add 6.6.0 release notes (#12321)
pingcap/docs: releases/release-6.6.0.md

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - 优化了 DM 的告警规则和内容。
  之前 DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error 类告警是遇到错误就报警，有些告警实际是由于 db conn 长时间 idle 导致，重连后即可恢复，为了降低这类 false alerm，现在细分为可自动恢复错误和不可恢复错误
          对不可自动恢复错误，维持旧的行为，立即 alert
          对可自动回复错误，只有在 2m 内发生超过 3 次时才报警
   [7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning
- 修复了一个在部分场景下 TiDB 重启导致 Lightning timeout 卡主的 bug。[33714](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33714) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@shichun-0415**
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiUP

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + Sync-diff-inspector

>         - 新增一个参数，当下游数据库的表在上游不存在时，可配置该参数跳过对上下游数据库表数量不一致场景的校验，而不是任务中断退出。 @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya9) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Add a new parameter `skip-non-existing-table` to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream [#692](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-tools/issues/692) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya9) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## 错误修复

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning timeout hangs due to TiDB restart in some scenarios [#33714](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33714) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@shichun-0415**
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
```

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

* MySQL 兼容的多值索引(Multi-Valued Index) (实验特性) [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**

    TiDB 在 v6.6.0 引入了 MySQL 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index)。 过滤 JSON 类型中某个数组的值是一个常见操作， 但普通索引对这类操作起不到加速作用，而在数组上创建多值索引能够大幅提升过滤的性能。 如果 JSON 类型中的某个数组上存在多值索引，  带有`MEMBER OF()`，`JSON_CONTAINS()`，`JSON_OVERLAPS()` 这几个函数的检索条件可以利用多值索引进行过滤，减少大量的 I/O 消耗，提升运行速度。

    多值索引的引入， 是对 JSON 类型的进一步增强， 同时也提升了 TiDB 对 MySQL 8.0 的兼容性。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#多值索引)。

* 绑定历史执行计划 GA [#39199](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39199) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@TomShawn**

    在 v6.5 中，TiDB 扩展了 [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) 语句中的绑定对象，支持根据历史执行计划创建绑定。在 v6.6 中这个功能 GA， 执行计划的选择不仅限在当前 TiDB 节点，任意 TiDB 节点产生的历史执行计划都可以被选为 [SQL Binding]((/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md)) 的目标，进一步提升了功能的易用性。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-plan-management.md#根据历史执行计划创建绑定)。

> * 支持 `ALTER TABLE…REORGANIZE PARTITION` [#15000](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/15000) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) **tw@qiancai**
> 
>     TiDB 支持 `ALTER TABLE…REORGANIZE PARTITION` 语法。此语法用于对表的部分分区、全部分区重新组织分区结构，并且不丢失数据。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/partitioned-table.md#重组分区)
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: remove this feature because it will be planned in a future release

* Support configuring `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE` for [placement rules in SQL](/placement-rules-in-sql.md) [#38605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38605) @nolouch[https://github.com/nolouch] **tw@qiancai**

    `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCES` provides data survival preference settings to increase the disaster survivability of data. By specifying `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE`, you can control the following:

    - For TiDB clusters deployed across regions, when a region with the specified databases or tables fails, another region can provide the service.
    - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single region, when an availability zone with the specified databases or tables fails, another availability zone can provide the service.

>      For more information，see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference)。

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).
```

### Security

* TiFlash supports automatic rotations of TLS certificates [#5503](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5503) @[ywqzzy](https://github.com/ywqzzy) **tw@qiancai**

>     For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. The rotation of a TLS certificate between componets within a TiDB cluster does not affect the normal use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures the cluster high availability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. The rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures the cluster high availability.
```

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/statement-summary-tables.md#持久化-statements-summary)。
### 性能

* 使用 Witness 节约成本  [#12876](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12876) [@Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) [@ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    在云环境中，当 TiKV 使用如 AWS EBS 或 GCP 的 Persistent Disk 作为单节点存储时，它们提供的持久性相比物理磁盘更高。此时，TiKV 使用 3 个 Raft 副本虽然可行，但并不必要。为了降低成本，TiKV 引入了 Witness 功能，即 2 Replicas With 1 Log Only 机制。其中 1 Log Only 副本仅存储 Raft 日志但不进行数据 apply，依然可以通过 Raft 协议保证数据一致性。与标准的 3 副本架构相比，Witness 可以节省存储资源及 CPU 使用率。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/use-witness-to-save-costs.md)。

* TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature [#4483](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/4483) @[hehechen](https://github.com/hehechen) **tw@qiancai**

   The Stale Read feature has been generally available (GA) since v5.1.1, which allows you to read historical data at a specific timestamp or within a specified time range. Stale read can reduce read latency and improve query performance by reading data from local TiKV replicas directly. Before v6.6.0, TiFlash does not support Stale Read. Even if a table has TiFlash replicas, Stale Read can only read its TiKV replicas.

>    Staring from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query historical data of a table using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` syntax or the `tidb_read_staleness` system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Starting from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query the historical data of a table using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` syntax or the `tidb_read_staleness` system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.
```

    | Warning | 1105 | skip plan-cache: '1' may be converted to INT |
    +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
    ```

    上述例子中， 优化器进行了非 INT 类型到 INT 类型的转换，产生的计划可能随着参数变化有风险，因此不缓存。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md#prepared-plan-cache-诊断)。

* 在慢查询中增加告警字段 [#39893](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39893) @[time-and-fate](https://github.com/time-and-fate) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    向慢查询日志中增加一个新的字段 `Warning` ，以 JSON 格式记录该慢查询语句在执行过程中产生的警告，用来协助查询性能问题的诊断。

    用户也可以在 TiDB Dashboard 中的慢查询页面中查看。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/identify-slow-queries.md)。

* 自动捕获执行计划的生成 [#38779](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38779) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer) **tw@ran-huang**

    在执行计划问题的排查过程中，`PLAN REPLAYER` 能够协助保存现场，提升诊断的效率。 但在个别场景中，一些执行计划的生成无法任意重现，给诊断工作增加了难度。 针对这类问题， `PLAN REPLAYER` 扩展了自动捕获的能力。 通过 `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` 命令字，用户可提前注册目标 SQL，也可以同时指定目标执行计划， 当 TiDB 检测到执行的 SQL 和执行计划与注册目标匹配时， 会自动生成并打包 `PLAN REPLAYER` 的信息，提升执行计划不稳定问题的诊断效率。

    启用这个功能需要设置系统变量 [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) 为 `ON`。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-capture-抓取目标计划)。

> * Statements Summary 持久化（实验特性） [#40812](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40812) @[mornyx](https://github.com/mornyx) **tw@shichun-0415**
> 
>     Statements Summary 过去只在内存中维护，一旦 TiDB 发生重启数据便会全部丢失。开启持久化配置后历史数据将会定期被写入磁盘，相关系统表的查询数据源也将由内存变为磁盘，TiDB 发生重启后历史数据将依然保持存在。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/statement-summary-tables.md#持久化-statements-summary)。

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* statements summary 持久化（实验特性） [#40812](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40812) @[mornyx](https://github.com/mornyx) **tw@shichun-0415**

    v6.6.0 之前版本，statements summary 数据在内存中维护，一旦 TiDB 发生重启，数据便会全部丢失。开启 statements summary 持久化特性后，历史数据将会定期被写入磁盘，相关系统表的查询数据源也将由内存变为磁盘。TiDB 重启后，历史数据将依然保持存在。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/statement-summary-tables.md#持久化-statements-summary)。

```

### 性能

* 使用 Witness 节约成本  [#12876](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12876) [@Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) [@ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    在云环境中，当 TiKV 使用如 AWS EBS 或 GCP 的 Persistent Disk 作为单节点存储时，它们提供的持久性相比物理磁盘更高。此时，TiKV 使用 3 个 Raft 副本虽然可行，但并不必要。为了降低成本，TiKV 引入了 Witness 功能，即 2 Replicas With 1 Log Only 机制。其中 1 Log Only 副本仅存储 Raft 日志但不进行数据 apply，依然可以通过 Raft 协议保证数据一致性。与标准的 3 副本架构相比，Witness 可以节省存储资源及 CPU 使用率。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/use-witness-to-save-costs.md)。

* TiFlash 引擎支持 Stale Read 功能 [#4483](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/4483) @[hehechen](https://github.com/hehechen) **tw@qiancai**

    在 v5.1.1 中，TiDB 正式发布了 Stale Read 功能，TiDB 可以读取指定的时间点或时间范围内的历史数据。Stale Read 允许引擎直接读取本地副本数据，降低读取延迟，提升查询性能。但是，只有 TiKV 引擎支持 Stale Read 功能，TiFlash 引擎并不支持 Stale Read 功能，即使查询的表包含 TiFlash 副本，TiDB 也只能使用 TiKV 副本进行指定时间点或时间范围内的历史数据查询。在 v6.6.0 中，TiFlash 引擎实现了对 Stale Read 功能的支持。使用语法 `AS OF TIMESTAMP` 或系统变量 `tidb_read_staleness` 等方式进行指定时间点或时间范围内的历史数据查询时，如果查询的表包含 TiFlash 副本，优化器可以选择 TiFlash 引擎读取指定的时间点或时间范围内的历史数据。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/stale-read.md)。

> * 新增支持下推以下字符串函数至 TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 新增支持下推以下字符串函数至 TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@qiancai****
```

    在 v6.6 中， 启用资源管控技术需要同时打开 TiDB 的全局变量 [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-%E4%BB%8E-v660-%E7%89%88%E6%9C%AC%E5%BC%80%E5%A7%8B%E5%BC%95%E5%85%A5) 及 TiKV 的配置项 [`resource_control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-%E4%BB%8E-v660-%E7%89%88%E6%9C%AC%E5%BC%80%E5%A7%8B%E5%BC%95%E5%85%A5)。 当前支持的限额方式是基于"[用量](/tidb-RU.md)" (即 Request Unit 或 RU )，RU 是 TiDB 对 CPU、IO 等系统资源的统一抽象单位。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/tidb-resource-control.md)。

* 使用临时 Witness 副本来加速副本恢复 [#12876](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12876) [@Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) [@ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow) **tw@Orexmt**

    Witness 功能可用于快速恢复 failover，以提高系统可用性。例如在 3 缺 1 的情况下，虽然满足多数派要求，但是系统很脆弱，而完整恢复一个新成员的时间通常很长（需要先拷贝 snapshot 然后 apply 最新的日志），特别是 Region snapshot 比较大的情况。而且拷贝副本的过程可能会对不健康的副本造成更多的压力。因此，先添加一个 Witness 可以快速下掉不健康的节点，保证恢复数据的过程中日志的安全性，后续再由 PD 的 rule checker 将 Witness 副本变为普通的 Voter。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/use-witness-to-speed-up-failover.md)。

### 易用性

> * 支持动态修改参数 store-io-pool-size [#13964](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13964) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 支持动态修改参数 `store-io-pool-size` [#13964](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13964) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

>     TiKV 中的 raftstore.store-io-pool-size 参数用于设定处理 Raft I/O 任务的线程池中线程的数量，需要在 TiKV 性能调优时进行修改调整。在 v6.6.0 版本之前，这个参数无法动态修改。v6.6.0 支持对该参数的动态修改功能，提高了 TiKV 性能调优的灵活性。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/dynamic-config.md)。
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiKV 中的 [`raftstore.store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-从-v530-版本开始引入)用于设定处理 Raft I/O 任务的线程池中线程的数量，需要在 TiKV 性能调优时进行修改调整。在 v6.6.0 版本之前，这个参数无法动态修改。v6.6.0 支持动态修改该参数，提高了 TiKV 性能调优的灵活性。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/dynamic-config.md)。

```

> * 可通过命令行参数或者配置项在 TiDB 集群初次启动时指定执行的初始化 SQL 脚本 [#35625](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/35625) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     命令行参数 `--initialize-sql-file` 用于指定 TiDB 集群初次启动时执行的 SQL 脚本，可用于修改系统变量的值，或者创建用户、分配权限等。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[配置项 `initialize-sql-file`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-从-v660-版本开始引入)。

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 支持指定集群初次启动时的初始化 SQL 脚本 [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@shichun-0415**

    TiDB 集群初次启动时，可通过命令行参数 `--initialize-sql-file` 指定执行的 SQL 脚本。该功能可用于修改系统变量的值，或者创建用户、分配权限等。

    更多信息，请参考[配置项 `initialize-sql-file`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-从-v660-版本开始引入)。
```

### 其他

## 废弃功能

## 改进提升

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - 优化了 DM 的告警规则和内容。
  之前 DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error 类告警是遇到错误就报警，有些告警实际是由于 db conn 长时间 idle 导致，重连后即可恢复，为了降低这类 false alerm，现在细分为可自动恢复错误和不可恢复错误
          对不可自动恢复错误，维持旧的行为，立即 alert
          对可自动回复错误，只有在 2m 内发生超过 3 次时才报警
   [7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

> - 修复了一个在部分场景下 TiDB 重启导致 Lightning timeout 卡主的 bug。[33714](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33714) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moved this note to the bug fix section.

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiUP

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + Sync-diff-inspector

>         - 新增一个参数，当下游数据库的表在上游不存在时，可配置该参数跳过对上下游数据库表数量不一致场景的校验，而不是任务中断退出。 @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya9) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - 新增一个参数 `skip-non-existing-table`，当下游数据库的表在上游不存在时，可配置该参数跳过对上下游数据库表数量不一致场景的校验，而不是任务中断退出 [#692](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-tools/issues/692) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya9) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## 错误修复

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - 修复了部分场景下 TiDB 重启导致 TiDB Lightning timeout 卡住的问题 [#33714](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33714) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@shichun-0415**
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
```

* TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature [#4483](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/4483) @[hehechen](https://github.com/hehechen) **tw@qiancai**

   The Stale Read feature has been generally available (GA) since v5.1.1, which allows you to read historical data at a specific timestamp or within a specified time range. Stale read can reduce read latency and improve query performance by reading data from local TiKV replicas directly. Before v6.6.0, TiFlash does not support Stale Read. Even if a table has TiFlash replicas, Stale Read can only read its TiKV replicas.

   Staring from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query historical data of a table using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` syntax or the `tidb_read_staleness` system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/stale-read.md).

* Support pushing down the `regexp_replace` string function to TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@qiancai**

> * TiFlash 引擎支持独立的 MVCC 位图过滤器 [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw@qiancai**
> 
>     TiFlash 引擎的数据扫描流程包含 MVCC 过滤和扫描列数据等操作。由于 MVCC 过滤和其他数据扫描操作具有较高的耦合性，导致无法对数据扫描流程进行优化改进。在 v6.6.0 中，TiFlash 将整体数据扫描流程中的 MVCC 过滤操作进行解耦，提供独立的 MVCC 位图过滤器，为后续优化数据扫描流程提供基础。
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Moved this feature description to "Improvements"

>     Before v6.6.0, statements summary data is maintained in memory. Once the TiDB server restarts, all the statements summary data gets lost. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB supports enabling statements summary persistence, which allows historical data to be written to disks on a regular basis. In the meantime, the result of queries on system tables will derive from disks, instead of memory. After TiDB restarts, all historical data is still available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, statements summary data is kept in memory and would be lost upon a TiDB server restarts. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB supports enabling statements summary persistence, which allows historical data to be written to disks on a regular basis. In the meantime, the result of queries on system tables will derive from disks, instead of memory. After TiDB restarts, all historical data remains available.
```

    - [`NO_ORDER_INDEX()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): tells the optimizer to use the specified index, not to keep the order of the index when reading data, and generates plans similar to `TopN + IndexScan(keep order: false)`.

    Continuously introducing optimizer hints provides users with more intervention methods, helps solve SQL performance issues, and improves the stability of overall performance.

> * Remove the limit on `LIMIT` statements [#40219](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40219) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@shichun-0415**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Remove the limit on `LIMIT` clauses [#40219](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40219) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@shichun-0415**
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/best-practices/readonly-nodes.md).

### Ease of use

* Support dynamically modifying `store-io-pool-size` [#13964](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13964) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator) **tw@shichun-0415**

    The TiKV configuration item [`raftstore.store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530) specifies the allowable number of threads that process Raft I/O tasks, which can be adjusted when tuning TiKV performance. Before v6.6.0, this configuration item cannot be modified dynamically. Starting from v6.6.0, you can modify this configuration without restarting the server, which means more flexible performance tuning.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dynamic-config.md).

* Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster intialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@shichun-0415**

>     When you start a TiDB cluster for the first time, you can specify the SQL script to be executed by configuring the CLI parameter `--initialize-sql-file`. You can use this feature when you need to perform such operations as modifying the value of a system variable, creating a user, or granting privileges.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    When you start a TiDB cluster for the first time, you can specify the SQL script to be executed by configuring the command line parameter `--initialize-sql-file`. You can use this feature when you need to perform such operations as modifying the value of a system variable, creating a user, or granting privileges.
```

    In v6.6.0, DM's full migration capability integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.

    Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

    For more information, see [documentation]/dm/dm-precheck.md#physical-import-check-items).

### TiDB data share subscription

* The TiKV-CDC tool is now GA and supports subscribing to data changes of RawKV [#48](https://github.com/tikv/migration/issues/48) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou) @[haojinming](https://github.com/haojinming) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiKV-CDC is a CDC (Change Data Capture) tool for TiKV clusters. TiKV can operate independently of TiDB and form a KV database with PD. In this case, the product is called RawKV. TiKV-CDC supports subscribing to data changes of RawKV and replicating them to a downstream TiKV cluster in real time, thus enabling cross-cluster replication of RawKV.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    TiKV-CDC is a CDC (Change Data Capture) tool for TiKV clusters. TiKV and PD can constitute a KV database when used without TiDB, which is called RawKV. TiKV-CDC supports subscribing to data changes of RawKV and replicating them to a downstream TiKV cluster in real time, thus enabling cross-cluster replication of RawKV.
```
Reference: [Back Up and Restore RawKV](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/rawkv-backup-and-restore)

    For more information, see [documentation](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/cdc/cdc/).

* TiCDC supports scaling out a single table on Kafka changefeeds and distributing the changefeed to multiple TiCDC nodes [#7720](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7720) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     Before v6.6.0, when the write throughput of the upstream table is large, the replication capability of a single table could not be scaled out, resulting in an increase in replication latency. Starting from TiCDC v6.6.0. the changefeed of an upstream table can be distributed to multiple TiCDC nodes in a Kafka sink, which enables scaling out the replication capability of a single table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, when a table in the upstream accepts a large amount of writes, the replication capability of this table cannot be scaled out, resulting in an increase in the replication latency. Starting from TiCDC v6.6.0. the changefeed of an upstream table can be distributed to multiple TiCDC nodes in a Kafka sink, which means the replication capability of a single table is scaled out.
```

| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of days to keep persistent data files. |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum size of a persistent data file (in MiB). |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of data files that can be persisted. `0` means no limit on the number of files. |
| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | New | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |

> |          |          |          |          |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| DM | Modified | [`import-mode`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | The possible values of this configuration item are changed from `"sql"` and `"loader"` to `"logical"` and `"physical"`. The default value is `"logical"`, which means using TiDB Lightning's logical import mode to import data. |
| DM | Deleted | `on-duplicate` | This configuration item controls the methods to resolve conflicts during the full import phase. In v6.6.0, new configuration items `on-duplicate-logical` and `on-duplicate-physical` are introduced to replace `on-duplicate`. |
| DM | Newly added | [`on-duplicate-logical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | This configuration item controls how DM resolves conflicting data in the logical import mode. The default value is `"replace"`, which means using the new data to replace the existing data. |
| DM | Newly added | [`on-duplicate-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | This configuration item controls how DM resolves conflicting data in the physical import mode. The default value is `"none"`, which means not resolving onflicting data. "none" has the best performance, but might lead to inconsistent data in the downstream database. |
| DM | Newly added | [`sorting-dir-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | The directory used for local KV sorting in the physical import mode. The default value is the same as the `dir` configuration. |
| DM | Newly added | [`disk-quota-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | This configuration item sets the disk quota. It corresponds to the [`disk-quota` configuration of TiDB Lightning](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-physical-import-mode-usage.md#configure-disk-quota-new-in-v620). |
| DM | Newly added | [`checksum-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | This configuration item controls whether DM performs `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` for each table to verify data integrity after the import. The default value is `"required"`, which performs admin checksum after the import. If checksum fails, DM pauses the task and you need to manually handle the failure. |
```

    For more information, see the [configuration item `initialize-sql-file`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660).

### MySQL compatibility

* Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraint [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-foreign-key.md).

### Data migration

* TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.6.0, DM's full migration capability integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.

>     Prior to v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

Author: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-foreign-key.md).

* 支持通过`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` 命令闪回 DDL 操作 [#14088](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/14088) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) **tw@ran-huang**

    [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) 语句支持在 Garbage Collection (GC) life time 内快速回退整个集群到指定的时间点，该功能在 TiDB v6.6.0 版本新增支持撤销 DDL 操作，适用于快速撤消集群的 DML 或 DDL 误操作、支持集群分钟级别的快速回退、支持在时间线上多次回退以确定特定数据更改发生的时间。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md)。

* 支持 DDL 分布式并行执行框架（实验性特性） [#issue](链接)  @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala) **tw@ran-huang**

    在过去的版本中，整个 TiDB 集群中仅允许一个 TiDB 实例作为 DDL Owner 有权处理 Schema 变更任务，为了进一步提升 DDL 的并发性，TiDB v6.6.0 版本引入了 DDL 分布式并行执行框架，支持集群中所有的 TiDB 实例都作为 Owner 并发执行同一个 Schema 变更子任务，加速 DDL 的执行。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

> * MySQL 兼容的多值索引(Multi-Valued Index) (实验特性) [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     TiDB 在 v6.6.0 引入了 MySQL 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index)。 过滤 JSON 类型中某个数组的值是一个常见操作， 但普通索引对这类操作起不到加速作用，而在数组上创建多值索引能够大幅提升过滤的性能。 如果 JSON 类型中的某个数组上存在多值索引，  带有`MEMBER OF()`，`JSON_CONTAINS()`，`JSON_OVERLAPS()` 这几个函数的检索条件可以利用多值索引进行过滤，减少大量的 I/O 消耗，提升运行速度。
> 
>     多值索引的引入， 是对 JSON 类型的进一步增强， 同时也提升了 TiDB 对 MySQL 8.0 的兼容性。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#多值索引)。

Author: ```suggestion
* Support the MySQL-compatible multi-valued index (experimental) [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**

    TiDB 在 v6.6.0 引入了 MySQL 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index)。过滤 JSON 列类型中某个数组的值是常见的操作，但普通索引对这类操作起不到加速作用。在数组上创建多值索引能够大幅提升过滤的性能。如果 JSON 类型中的某个数组上存在多值索引，那么可以利用多值索引过滤带有 `MEMBER OF()`、`JSON_CONTAINS()`、`JSON_OVERLAPS()` 函数的检索条件，从而减少大量的 I/O 消耗，提升运行速度。
    TiDB introduces the MySQL-compatible multi-valued index in v6.6.0. Filtering the values of an array in a JSON column type is a common operation, but normal indexes cannot help speed up such an operation. Creating a multi-valued index on an array can greatly improve filtering performance. If an array in the JSON type has a multi-valued index, you can use the multi-value index to filter the retrieval conditions with `MEMBER OF()`, `JSON_CONTAINS()`, `JSON_OVERLAPS()` functions, thereby reducing much I/O consumption and improving operation speed.

    多值索引的引入， 进一步增强了 JSON 类型， 同时也提升了 TiDB 对 MySQL 8.0 的兼容性。
    Introducing multi-valued indexes further enhances the JSON type and also improves TiDB's compatibility with MySQL 8.0.

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#多值索引)。
    For details, see [user documentation]((/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index)
```

> * 绑定历史执行计划 GA [#39199](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39199) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     在 v6.5 中，TiDB 扩展了 [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) 语句中的绑定对象，支持根据历史执行计划创建绑定。在 v6.6 中这个功能 GA， 执行计划的选择不仅限在当前 TiDB 节点，任意 TiDB 节点产生的历史执行计划都可以被选为 [SQL Binding]((/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md)) 的目标，进一步提升了功能的易用性。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-plan-management.md#根据历史执行计划创建绑定)。

Author: ```suggestion
* Binding historical execution plans is GA  [#39199](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39199) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@TomShawn**

    在 v6.5.0 中，TiDB 扩展了 [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) 语句中的绑定对象，支持根据历史执行计划创建绑定。在 v6.6.0 中该功能 GA，执行计划的选择不仅限于当前 TiDB 节点，任意 TiDB 节点产生的历史执行计划都可以被选为 [SQL Binding](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) 的目标，进一步提升了功能的易用性。
    In v6.5.0, TiDB extends the binding targets in the [`CREATE [GLOBAL | SESSION] BINDING`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md) statements and supports creating bindings according to historical execution plans. In v6.6.0, this feature is GA. The selection of execution plans is not limited to the current TiDB node. Any historical execution plan generated by any TiDB node can be selected as the target of [SQL binding](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-binding.md), which further improves the feature usability.

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-plan-management.md#根据历史执行计划创建绑定)。
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#create-a-binding-according-to-a-historical-execution-plan).
```

    `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCES` provides data survival preference settings to increase the disaster survivability of data. By specifying `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE`, you can control the following:

    - For TiDB clusters deployed across cloud regions, when a cloud region fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another cloud region.

>     - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single cloud region, when an availability fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another availability zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single cloud region, when an availability zone fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another availability zone.
```

     For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).

### Security

* TiFlash supports automatic rotations of TLS certificates [#5503](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5503) @[ywqzzy](https://github.com/ywqzzy) **tw@qiancai**

    For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. The rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures the cluster high availability.

    For more information, see [documentation](/enable-tls-between-components.md).

### 可观测性

* 快速绑定执行计划 [#781](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-dashboard/issues/781) @[YiniXu9506](https://github.com/YiniXu9506) **tw@ran-huang**

    TiDB 的执行计划快速绑定功能：允许用户在 TiDB Dashboard 中一分钟内完成 SQL 与特定计划的绑定。

    通过提供友好的界面简化在 TiDB 上绑定计划的过程，减少计划绑定过程的复杂性提高用户体验，提高计划绑定过程的效率。

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/dashboard/dashboard-statement-details.md)。

> * 为执行计划缓存增加告警 [#issue号](链接) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     当执行计划无法进入执行计划缓存时， TiDB 会通过 warning 的方式说明其无法被缓存的原因， 降低诊断的难度。例如：
> 
>     ```sql
>     mysql> prepare st from 'select * from t where a<?';
>     Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
> 
>     mysql> set @a='1';
>     Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
> 
>     mysql> execute st using @a;
>     Empty set, 1 warning (0.01 sec)
> 
>     mysql> show warnings;
>     +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
>     | Level   | Code | Message                                      |
>     +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
>     | Warning | 1105 | skip plan-cache: '1' may be converted to INT |
>     +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
>     ```
> 
>     上述例子中， 优化器进行了非 INT 类型到 INT 类型的转换，产生的计划可能随着参数变化有风险，因此不缓存。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md#prepared-plan-cache-诊断)。

Author: ```suggestion
* 为执行计划缓存增加告警 @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**
* Add warning for caching execution plans @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**

    当执行计划无法被缓存时，TiDB 会通过告警的方式提示该计划无法被缓存的原因，降低诊断的难度。例如：
    When an execution plan cannot be cached, TiDB indicates the reason in warning to make diagnostics easier. For example:

    ```sql
    mysql> PREPARE st FROM 'SELECT * FROM t WHERE a<?';
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

    mysql> SET @a='1';
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

    mysql> EXECUTE st USING @a;
    Empty set, 1 warning (0.01 sec)

    mysql> SHOW WARNINGS;
    +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Level   | Code | Message                                      |
    +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
    | Warning | 1105 | skip plan-cache: '1' may be converted to INT |
    +---------+------+----------------------------------------------+
    ```

    在以上例子中，优化器进行了非 INT 类型到 INT 类型的转换，产生的执行计划可能随着参数变化而存在风险，因此 TiDB 不缓存该计划。
    In the preceding example, the optimizer converts a non-INT type to an INT type, and the execution plan might change with the change of the parameter, so TiDB does not cache the plan.

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md#prepared-plan-cache-诊断)。
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md#diagnostics-of-prepared-plan-cache).
```

* TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature [#4483](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/4483) @[hehechen](https://github.com/hehechen) **tw@qiancai**

   The Stale Read feature has been generally available (GA) since v5.1.1, which allows you to read historical data at a specific timestamp or within a specified time range. Stale read can reduce read latency and improve query performance by reading data from local TiKV replicas directly. Before v6.6.0, TiFlash does not support Stale Read. Even if a table has TiFlash replicas, Stale Read can only read its TiKV replicas.

   Starting from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query the historical data of a table using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` syntax or the `tidb_read_staleness` system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.

    For more information, see [documentation](/stale-read.md).

* Support pushing down the `regexp_replace` string function to TiFlash [#6115](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6115) @[xzhangxian1008](https://github.com/xzhangxian1008) **tw@qiancai**

> * 批量聚合数据请求 [#39361](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39361) @[cfzjywxk](https://github.com/cfzjywxk) @[you06](https://github.com/you06) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     当 TiDB 向 TiKV 发送数据请求时， 会根据数据所在的 Region 将请求编入不同的子任务，每个子任务只处理单个 Region 的请求。 当访问的数据离散度很高时， 即使数据量不大，也会生成众多的子任务，进而产生大量 RPC 请求，消耗额外的时间。 在 v6.6.0 中，TiDB 支持将发送到相同 TiKV 实例的数据请求部分合并，减少子任务的数量和 RPC 请求的开销。 在数据离散度高且 gRPC 线程池资源紧张的情况下，批量化请求能够将性能提升 50% 以上。
> 
>     此特性默认打开， 通过系统变量 [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size) 设置批量请求的大小。

Author: ```suggestion
* Batch aggregate data requests [#39361](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39361) @[cfzjywxk](https://github.com/cfzjywxk) @[you06](https://github.com/you06) **tw@TomShawn**

    When TiDB sends a data request to TiKV, TiDB will compile the request into different sub-tasks according to the Region where the data is located, and each sub-task only processes the request of a single Region. When the data to be accessed is highly dispersed, even if the size of the data is not large, many sub-tasks will be generated, which in turn will generate many RPC requests and consume extra time. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB supports partially merging data requests that are sent to the same TiKV instance, which reduces the number of sub-tasks and the overhead of RPC requests. In the case of high data dispersion and insufficient gRPC thread pool resources, batching requests can improve performance by more than 50%.

    This feature is enabled by default. You can set the batch size of requests using the system variable [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size).
```

> * 新增一系列优化器 Hint [#39964](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39964) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     TiDB 在新版本中增加了一系列优化器 Hint， 用来控制 `LIMIT` 操作的执行计划选择，以及 MPP 执行过程中的部分行为。 其中包括：
> 
>     - [`KEEP_ORDER()`](/optimizer-hints.md#keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): 提示优化器使用指定的索引，读取时保持索引的顺序。 生成类似 `Limit + IndexScan(keep order: true)` 的计划。
>     - [`NO_KEEP_ORDER()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): 提示优化器使用指定的索引，读取时不保持顺序。 生成类似 `TopN + IndexScan(keep order: false)` 的计划。
>     - [`SHUFFLE_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#shuffle_joint1_name--tl_name-): 针对 MPP 生效。 提示优化器对指定表使用 Shuffle Join 算法。
>     - [`BROADCAST_JOIN()`](/optimizer-hints.md#broadcast_joint1_name--tl_name-): 针对 MPP 生效。提示优化器对指定表使用 Broadcast Join 算法。
>     - [`MPP_1PHASE_AGG()`](/optimizer-hints.md#mpp_1phase_agg): 针对 MPP 生效。提示优化器对指定查询块中所有聚合函数使用一阶段聚合算法。
>     - [`MPP_2PHASE_AGG()`](/optimizer-hints.md#mpp_2phase_agg): 针对 MPP 生效。 提示优化器对指定查询块中所有聚合函数使用二阶段聚合算法。
> 
>     优化器 Hint 的持续引入，为用户提供了更多的干预手段，有助于 SQL 性能问题的解决，并提升了整体性能的稳定性。

Author: ```suggestion
* Add several optimizer hints [#39964](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39964) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent) **tw@TomShawn**

    TiDB adds several optimizer hints in v6.6.0 to control the selection of `LIMIT` operations in execution plans.

    - [`ORDER_INDEX()`](/optimizer-hints.md#keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): tells the optimizer to use the specified index, to keep the order of the index when reading data, and generates plans similar to `Limit + IndexScan(keep order: true)`.
    - [`NO_ORDER_INDEX()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): tells the optimizer to use the specified index, not to keep the order of the index when reading data, and generates plans similar to `TopN + IndexScan(keep order: false)`.

    Continuously introducing optimizer hints provides users with more intervention methods, helps solve SQL performance issues, and improves the stability of overall performance.
```

* Remove the limit on `LIMIT` statements [#40219](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40219) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@shichun-0415**

    Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB plan cache supports caching queries containing `?` after `Limit`, such as `Limit ?` or `Limit 10, ?`. This feature allows more SQL statements to benefit from plan cache, thus improving execution efficiency.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md).

> * 悲观锁队列的稳定唤醒模型 [#13298](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13298) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta) **tw@TomShawn**
> 
>     如果业务场景存在单点悲观锁冲突频繁的情况，原有的唤醒机制无法保证事务获取锁的时间，造成长尾延迟高，甚至获取超时。 在 v6.6.0 中，通过设置系统变量 [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-从-v660-版本开始引入) 为 `ON` 可以开启悲观锁的稳定唤醒模型。 在新的唤醒模型下， 队列的唤醒顺序可被严格控制，避免无效的唤醒造成的资源浪费，在锁冲突严重的场景中，能够减少长尾延时，降低 P99 响应时间。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-从-v660-版本开始引入)。

Author: ```suggestion
* Support a stable wake-up model for pessimistic lock queues [#13298](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13298) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta) **tw@TomShawn**

    If an application scenario encounters frequent single-point pessimistic lock conflicts, the existing wake-up mechanism cannot guarantee the time for transactions to acquire locks, which causes high long-tail latency and even lock acquisition timeout. Starting from v6.6.0, you can enable a stable wake-up model for pessimistic locks by setting the value of the system variable [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) to `ON`. In this wake-up model, the wake-up sequence of a queue can be strictly controlled to avoid the waste of resources caused by invalid wake-ups. In scenarios with serious lock conflicts, long-tail latency and the P99 response time can be reduced.

    For details, see [documentation](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660).
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

* TiFlash supports data exchange with compression [#6620](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6620) @[solotzg](https://github.com/solotzg) **tw@TomShawn**

    To cooperate with multiple nodes for computing, the TiFlash engine needs to exchange data among different nodes. When the size of the data to be exchanged is very large, the performance of data exchange might affect the overall computing efficiency. In v6.6.0, the TiFlash engine introduces a compression mechanism to compress the data that needs to be exchanged when necessary, and then to perform the exchange, thereby improving the efficiency of data exchange.

    For details, see [documentation]().

```

>    Starting from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query the historical data of a table using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` syntax or the `tidb_read_staleness` system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Starting from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query the historical data of a table using the [`AS OF TIMESTAMP`](/as-of-timestamp.md) syntax or the [`tidb_read_staleness`](/tidb-read-staleness.md) system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.
```

### 事务

* 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

### 稳定性

> * 基于资源组的资源管控 (实验特性) #[38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw@hfxsd**
> 
>     TiDB 集群支持创建资源组，将不用的数据库用户映射到对应的资源组中，根据实际需要设置每个资源组的配额。当集群资源紧张时，来自同一个资源组的会话所使用的全部资源将被限制在配额内，避免其中一个资源组过度消耗从而抑制其他资源组中的会话正常运行。系统内置视图会对资源的实际使用情况进行反馈和展示，协助用户更合理地配置资源。
> 
>     资源管控技术的引入对 TiDB 具有里程碑的意义，它能够将一个分布式数据库集群中划分成多个逻辑单元，即使个别单元对资源过度使用，也不会完全挤占其他单元所需的资源。利用这个技术，你可以将数个来自不同系统的中小型应用合入一个 TiDB 集群中，个别应用的负载提升，不会影响其他业务的正常运行；而在系统负载较低的时候，繁忙的应用即使超过限额，也仍旧可以被分配到所需的系统资源，达到资源的最大化利用。 同样的，你可以选择将所有测试环境合入一个集群，或者将消耗较大的批量任务编入一个单独的资源组，在保证重要应用获得必要资源的同时，提升硬件利用率，降低运行成本。另外，合理利用资源管控技术可以减少集群数量，降低运维难度及管理成本。
> 
>     在 v6.6 中， 启用资源管控技术需要同时打开 TiDB 的全局变量 [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-%E4%BB%8E-v660-%E7%89%88%E6%9C%AC%E5%BC%80%E5%A7%8B%E5%BC%95%E5%85%A5) 及 TiKV 的配置项 [`resource_control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-%E4%BB%8E-v660-%E7%89%88%E6%9C%AC%E5%BC%80%E5%A7%8B%E5%BC%95%E5%85%A5)。 当前支持的限额方式是基于"[用量](/tidb-RU.md)" (即 Request Unit 或 RU )，RU 是 TiDB 对 CPU、IO 等系统资源的统一抽象单位。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](/tidb-resource-control.md)。

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Resource control based on resource groups (experimental) #[38825](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38825) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) @[BornChanger](https://github.com/BornChanger) @[glorv](https://github.com/glorv) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes) @[CabinfeverB](https://github.com/CabinfeverB) @[HuSharp](https://github.com/HuSharp) **tw@hfxsd**

    TiDB clusters support creating resource groups, binding database users to corresponding resource groups, and setting quotas for each resource group according to actual needs. When the cluster resources are limited, all resources used by sessions from the same resource group will be limited to the quota, so that one resource group will not be over-consumed and affect the normal operation of sessions in other resource groups. The built-in view of the system will display the actual usage of resources, assisting you to allocate resources more rationally.

    The introduction of the resource control feature is a milestone for TiDB. It can divide a distributed database cluster into multiple logical units. Even if an individual unit overuses resources, it does not crowd out the resources needed by other units. 

    With this feature, you can:

    - Combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into one TiDB cluster. If the load of an individual application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other businesses. When the system load is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources.
    - Choose to combine all test environments into a single cluster, or group the batch tasks that consume more resources into a single resource group. It can improve hardware utilization and reduce operating costs while ensuring that critical applications can still get the necessary resources.

    In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    In v6.6, you need to enable both TiDB's global variable [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) and the TiKV configuration item [`resource_control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource_control) to enable resource control. The currently supported quota method is based on "[Request Unit (RU)](/tidb-resource-control.md#what-is-request-unit-ru)". RU is TiDB's unified abstraction unit for system resources such as CPU and IO.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).
```

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

         Optimize DM alert rules and content. [7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

         Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever an error occured. But some alerts are actually caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce this kind of alerts, the alerts are divided into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors.

        - For errors that are automatically recoverable, report the alert only if the error occurs more than 3 times within 2 minutes.

>         - For errors that are not automatically recoverable, maintain the original behavior and report the alert immediately.

Reviewer 2: 用 an error 方便和后面的 the error  对应

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#create-a-binding-according-to-a-historical-execution-plan).

* Support configuring `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE` for [placement rules in SQL](/placement-rules-in-sql.md) [#38605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38605) @nolouch[https://github.com/nolouch] **tw@qiancai**

    `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCES` provides data survival preference settings to increase the disaster survivability of data. By specifying `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE`, you can control the following:

    - For TiDB clusters deployed across cloud regions, when a cloud region fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another cloud region.
    - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single cloud region, when an availability fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another availability zone.

     For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).

### Security

* TiFlash supports automatic rotations of TLS certificates [#5503](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5503) @[ywqzzy](https://github.com/ywqzzy) **tw@qiancai**

>     For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. The rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures high availability of the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In v6.6.0, TiDB supports automatic rotations of TiFlash TLS certificates. For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. In addition, the rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures high availability of the cluster.
```

    Before v6.6.0, when a table in the upstream accepts a large amount of writes, the replication capability of this table cannot be scaled out, resulting in an increase in the replication latency. Starting from TiCDC v6.6.0. the changefeed of an upstream table can be distributed to multiple TiCDC nodes in a Kafka sink, which means the replication capability of a single table is scaled out.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#scale-out-the-load-of-a-single-large-table-to-multiple-ticdc-nodes).

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| [`tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit--new-in-v660) | New | Controls whether Prepared Plan Cache caches execution plans that contain `count` after `Limit`. The default value is `ON`, which means Prepared Plan Cache supports caching such execution plans. Note that Prepared Plan Cache does not support caching execution plans with a `count` that is greater than 10000. |

> | [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-%E4%BB%8E-v660-%E7%89%88%E6%9C%AC%E5%BC%80%E5%A7%8B%E5%BC%95%E5%85%A5) | 新增  | 该变量是资源管控特性的开关。该变量设置为 `ON` 后，集群支持应用按照资源组做资源隔离。 |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660 | New  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |
```

| [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size) | 修改 | 此变量可用于生产环境。 设置 `IndexLookUp` 算子回表时多个 Coprocessor Task 的 batch 大小。`0` 代表不使用 batch。当 `IndexLookUp` 算子的回表 Task 数量特别多，出现极长的慢查询时，可以适当调大该参数以加速查询。 |
| [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-从-v660-版本开始引入) | 新增 | 是否对悲观锁启用加强的悲观锁唤醒模型。 |
| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) | 新增 | 这个变量用来控制是否开启 [`PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE`](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-capture-抓取目标计划)。默认值 `OFF`， 代表关闭 `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE`。 |

### Configuration file parameters

| 配置文件 | 配置项 | 修改类型 | 描述 |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

> | TiKV | [`resource_control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-%E4%BB%8E-v660-%E7%89%88%E6%9C%AC%E5%BC%80%E5%A7%8B%E5%BC%95%E5%85%A5) | 新增 | 是否支持按照资源组配额调度。 默认 `false` ，即关闭按照资源组配额调度。 |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | New | Whether to support scheduling for user foreground read/write requests according to the Request Unit (RU) of the corresponding resource groups.  The default value is `false`, which means to disable scheduling based on the RU of the corresponding resource groups.|
```

### Others

- Support dynamically modifying `store-io-pool-size`. This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.
- Remove the limit on `LIMIT` statements, thus improving the execution performance.

## 废弃功能

## 改进提升

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides a foundation for subsequent optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin] **tw@qiancai**
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiCDC

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

>         - 优化了 DM 的告警规则和内容。
>   之前 DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error 类告警是遇到错误就报警，有些告警实际是由于 db conn 长时间 idle 导致，重连后即可恢复，为了降低这类 false alerm，现在细分为可自动恢复错误和不可恢复错误
>           对不可自动恢复错误，维持旧的行为，立即 alert
>           对可自动回复错误，只有在 2m 内发生超过 3 次时才报警
>    [7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
         Optimize DM alert rules and content. [7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**
        
         Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever an error occured. But some alerts are actually caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce this kind of alerts, the alerts are divided into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors.
        
        - For errors that are automatically recoverable, report the alert only if the error occurs more than 3 times within 2 minutes.
        - For errors that are not automatically recoverable, maintain the original behavior and report the alert immediately.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/dynamic-config.md).

* Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster intialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@shichun-0415**

    When you start a TiDB cluster for the first time, you can specify the SQL script to be executed by configuring the CLI parameter `--initialize-sql-file`. You can use this feature when you need to perform such operations as modifying the value of a system variable, creating a user, or granting privileges.

    For more information, see the [configuration item `initialize-sql-file`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660).

### MySQL 兼容性

* 功能标题 [#issue号](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    功能描述（需要包含这个功能是什么、在什么场景下对用户有什么价值、怎么用）

    更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

### 数据迁移

> * Data Migration(DM) 集成了 Lightning 的 Physical Import Mode ，全量迁移性能最高提升  10 倍  @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**
> 
>     功能描述 ：Data Migration (DM)的全量迁移能力，集成了 Lightning 的 Physical Import Mode ，使得 DM 做全量数据迁移时的性能最高可提升 10 倍，大大缩短了大数据量场景下的迁移时间。原先客户数据量较多时，客户得单独配置 Lightning 的 Physical Import Mode 的任务来做快速的全量数据迁移，之后再用 DM 来做增量数据迁移，配置复杂。现在集成该能力后，用户迁移大数据量的场景，无需再配置 Lightning 的任务，在一个 DM 任务里就可以搞定了。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](https://github.com/pingcap/docs-cn/pull/12296)。

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.6.0, DM's full migration capability integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios. 

    Prior to v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

    For more information, see [documentation]/dm/dm-precheck.md#physical-import-check-items).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#create-a-binding-according-to-a-historical-execution-plan).

* Support configuring `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE` for [placement rules in SQL](/placement-rules-in-sql.md) [#38605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38605) @nolouch[https://github.com/nolouch] **tw@qiancai**

    `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCES` provides data survival preference settings to increase the disaster survivability of data. By specifying `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE`, you can control the following:

    - For TiDB clusters deployed across regions, when a region with the specified databases or tables fails, another region can provide the service.

>     - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single region, when an availability zone with the specified databases or tables fails, another availability zone can provide the service.

Reviewer 5: “with the specified databases or tables” 这里的 with 不太清楚是指什么，建议改下措辞。可以等这句话的中文确认后再更新下。

     For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).

### Security

* TiFlash supports automatic rotations of TLS certificates [#5503](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5503) @[ywqzzy](https://github.com/ywqzzy) **tw@qiancai**

>     For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. The rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures the cluster high availability.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. The rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures high availability of the cluster.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/use-witness-to-save-costs.md).

* TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature [#4483](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/4483) @[hehechen](https://github.com/hehechen) **tw@qiancai**

   The Stale Read feature has been generally available (GA) since v5.1.1, which allows you to read historical data at a specific timestamp or within a specified time range. Stale read can reduce read latency and improve query performance by reading data from local TiKV replicas directly. Before v6.6.0, TiFlash does not support Stale Read. Even if a table has TiFlash replicas, Stale Read can only read its TiKV replicas.

>    Starting from v6.6.0, TiFlash supports the Stale Read feature. When you query the historical data of a table using the `AS OF TIMESTAMP` syntax or the `tidb_read_staleness` system variable, if the table has a TiFlash replica, the optimizer now can choose to read the corresponding data from the TiFlash replica, thus further improving query performance.

Reviewer 5: 可以给 `AS OF TIMESTAMP` 和 `tidb_read_staleness` 加上链接。

| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of data files that can be persisted. `0` means no limit on the number of files. |
| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | New | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
|          |          |          |          |

### Others

- Support dynamically modifying `store-io-pool-size`. This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.
- Remove the limit on `LIMIT` statements, thus improving the execution performance.

## 废弃功能

## 改进提升

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

>     - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides a foundation for subsequent optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin] **tw@qiancai**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides a foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin] **tw@qiancai**
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/dynamic-config.md).

* Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster intialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@shichun-0415**

    When you start a TiDB cluster for the first time, you can specify the SQL script to be executed by configuring the command line parameter `--initialize-sql-file`. You can use this feature when you need to perform such operations as modifying the value of a system variable, creating a user, or granting privileges.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660).

### MySQL compatibility

* Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraint [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-foreign-key.md).

> 

Author: ```suggestion

* Support the MySQL-compatible multi-valued index [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**

    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

```

| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of days to keep persistent data files. |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum size of a persistent data file (in MiB). |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of data files that can be persisted. `0` means no limit on the number of files. |
| TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | New | Whether to enable scheduling for user foreground read/write requests according to the Request Unit (RU) of the corresponding resource groups. The default value is `false`, which means to disable scheduling according to the RU of the corresponding resource groups.|

> | PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-new-in-v660) | New | The memory usage limit for a PD instance. The default value `0.8` means that the memory usage of a PD instance is limited to 80% of the total memory by default.  |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-new-in-v660) | New | The memory usage limit for a PD instance, which is disabled by default.  |
```

| PD  |  [`pd-server.server-memory-limit-gc-trigger`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-gc-trigger-new-in-v660) | New | The threshold at which PD tries to trigger GC. The default value is `0.7`. |

> | PD  | [`pd-server.enable-gogc-tuner`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-gogc-tuner-new-in-v660) | New | Controls whether to enable the GOGC tuner, which is enabled by default. |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| PD  | [`pd-server.enable-gogc-tuner`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-gogc-tuner-new-in-v660) | New | Controls whether to enable the GOGC tuner, which is disabled by default. |
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-DMR

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://cn.pingcap.com/product-community/)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

- MySQL 8.0 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index) (实验特性)
- 基于资源组的资源管控 (实验特性)
- 悲观锁队列的稳定唤醒模型
- 数据请求的批量聚合

## New features

### SQL

* Support dynamically managing the resource usage of DDL operations (experimental) [#38025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38025)  @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@ran-huang**

    TiDB v6.6.0 introduces resource management for DDL operations to reduce the impact of DDL changes on online applications by automatically controlling the CPU usage of these operations. This feature is effective only after the [DDL distributed parallel execution framework](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg-new-in-v660) is enabled.

* Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     TiDB v6.6.0 introduces the foreign key constraints feature, which is compatible with MySQL. This feature supports referencing within a table or between tables, constraints validation, and cascade operations. This feature helps to maintain data consistency, improve data quality, and facilitate data modeling.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    TiDB v6.6.0 introduces the foreign key constraints feature, which is compatible with MySQL. This feature supports referencing within a table or between tables, constraints validation, and cascade operations. This feature helps to migrate applications to TiDB, maintain data consistency, improve data quality, and facilitate data modeling.
```

1. I think application migration and correct ORM support are important to name here.
2. I think foreign keys is the most important feature of this release. Maybe list it as the first item or so?

Reviewer 3: > I think foreign keys is the most important feature of this release. Maybe list it as the first item or so?

@dveeden After confirming with PM @easonn7, the **resource management** feature is also important. I add foreign keys as a **key new feature** [here](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/12321/files#r1100946919)

    For more information, see [documentation](/foreign-key.md).

* Support rolling back DDL operations via the `FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` statement [#14088](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/14088) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) **tw@ran-huang**

>     The [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement supports restoring the entire cluster to a specified point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) lifetime. In TiDB v6.6.0, this feature adds support for rolling back DDL operations. This can be used to quickly undo a DML or DDL misoperation on a cluster, roll back a cluster within minutes, and roll back a cluster multiple times on the timeline to determine when specific data changes occurred.

Reviewer 7: Does it only rollback the schema or the schema and data? This isn't really clear from the text here.

Reviewer 8: It will rollback schema and data. The text said `restoring the entire cluster to a specified point`. Do you have comments how to change it will be better here?

maybe change `a DML or DDL misoperation` to `DML and DDL misoperations` will be better?

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    The [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement supports restoring the entire cluster to a specified point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) lifetime. In TiDB v6.6.0, this feature adds support for rolling back any DDL or DML operations. This can be used to quickly undo a DML or DDL misoperation on a cluster, roll back a cluster within minutes, and roll back a cluster multiple times on the timeline to determine when specific data changes occurred.
```

Maybe something like this?

Reviewer 8: This release adds support for DDL. `flashback` DML has been supported in v6.5.0.

And not all DDLs are supported, some DDLs that modify etcd will not be supported.

Reviewer 8: Maybe change to `In TiDB v6.6.0, this feature adds support for rolling back DDL operations. Now this can be used to quickly undo most DML and DDL misoperations on a cluster,` is better? @dveeden

    With this feature, you can:

    - Combine multiple small and medium-sized applications from different systems into a single TiDB cluster. When the workload of an application grows larger, it does not affect the normal operation of other applications. When the system workload is low, busy applications can still be allocated the required system resources even if they exceed the set read and write quotas, so as to achieve the maximum utilization of resources.
    - Choose to combine all test environments into a single TiDB cluster, or group the batch tasks that consume more resources into a single resource group. It can improve hardware utilization and reduce operating costs while ensuring that critical applications can always get the necessary resources.

    In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

>     In v6.6, you need to enable both TiDB's global variable [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) and the TiKV configuration item [`resource_control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource_control) to enable resource control. Currently, the supported quota method is based on "[Request Unit (RU)](/tidb-resource-control.md#what-is-request-unit-ru)". RU is TiDB's unified abstraction unit for system resources such as CPU and IO.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    In v6.6, you need to enable both TiDB's global variable [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) and the TiKV configuration item [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource_control) to enable resource control. Currently, the supported quota method is based on "[Request Unit (RU)](/tidb-resource-control.md#what-is-request-unit-ru)". RU is TiDB's unified abstraction unit for system resources such as CPU and IO.
```

    The TiKV configuration item [`raftstore.store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530) specifies the allowable number of threads that process Raft I/O tasks, which can be adjusted when tuning TiKV performance. Before v6.6.0, this configuration item cannot be modified dynamically. Starting from v6.6.0, you can modify this configuration without restarting the server, which means more flexible performance tuning.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dynamic-config.md).

* Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster intialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@shichun-0415**

    When you start a TiDB cluster for the first time, you can specify the SQL script to be executed by configuring the command line parameter `--initialize-sql-file`. You can use this feature when you need to perform such operations as modifying the value of a system variable, creating a user, or granting privileges.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660).

> ### MySQL compatibility

Author: good point! added in https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/12321/files#r1100934104

* Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraint [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-foreign-key.md).

### Data migration

> * TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**

Author: ```suggestion
* TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration (experimental) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**
```

| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) | New | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-capture-to-capture-target-plans). The default value `OFF` means to disable the `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature. |
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660 | New  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |
| [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) | New | Determines whether to use enhanced pessimistic locking wake-up model for pessimistic transactions. The default value `OFF` means not to use such a wake-up model for for pessimistic transactions by default. |

### Configuration file parameters

> | Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |

Author: a bit too late for this time. will have a try the next time.

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-DMR

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://cn.pingcap.com/product-community/)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

- MySQL 8.0 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index) (实验特性)
- 基于资源组的资源管控 (实验特性)
- 悲观锁队列的稳定唤醒模型
- 数据请求的批量聚合

## New features

### SQL

> * 支持 DDL 动态资源管控（实验性特性） [#issue](链接)  @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@ran-huang**
> 
>     TiDB v6.6.0 版本引入了 DDL 动态资源管控， 通过自动控制 DDL 的 CPU 和内存使用量，尽量降低 DDL 变更任务对线上业务的影响。
> 
>     更多信息，请参考[用户文档](链接)。

Author: ```suggestion
* Support dynamically managing the resource usage of DDL operations (experimental) [#38025](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38025)  @[hawkingrei](https://github.com/hawkingrei) **tw@ran-huang**

    TiDB v6.6.0 introduces resource management for DDL operations to reduce the impact of DDL changes on online applications by automatically controlling the CPU usage of these operations. This feature is effective only after the [DDL distributed parallel execution framework](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg-new-in-v660) is enabled.
```

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiDB Lightning
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + TiUP

        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

    + Sync-diff-inspector

        - Add a new parameter `skip-non-existing-table` to control whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream [#692](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-tools/issues/692) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya94) **tw@shichun-0415**
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Bug fixes

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiFlash

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when restoring log backup, hot Regions cause the restore to fail [#37207](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37207) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-DMR

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://cn.pingcap.com/product-community/)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

- MySQL 8.0 兼容的多值索引 (Multi-Valued Index) (实验特性)

> - 基于资源组的资源管控 (实验特性)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- 基于资源组的资源管控 (实验特性)
- Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints
```

## Compatibility changes

### System variables

| Variable name  | Change type    | Description |
|--------|------------------------------|------|
| `tidb_enable_amend_pessimistic_txn` | Deleted  | Starting from v6.5.0, this variable is deprecated. Starting from v6.6.0, this feature and the `AMEND TRANSACTION` feature are deleted. TiDB will use the [meta lock](/metadata-lock.md) mechanism to resolve the `Information schema is changed` error.  |
| `tidb_enable_concurrent_ddl` | Deleted | This variable controls whether to allow TiDB to use concurrent DDL statements. When this variable is disabled, TiDB uses the old DDL execution framework, which provides limited support for concurrent DDL execution. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is deleted and TiDB no longer supports the old DDL execution framework.  |
| `tidb_ttl_job_run_interval` | Deleted | This variable is used to control the scheduling interval of TTL jobs in the background. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is deleted, because TiDB provides the `TTL_JOB_INTERVAL` attribute for every table to control the TTL runtime, which is more flexible than `tidb_ttl_job_run_interval`.  |

> | [`foreign_key_checks`](/system-variables.md#foreign_key_checks) | Modified |  This variables controls whether to enable the foreign key constraint check. The default value changes from `OFF` to `ON`, which means to enable the foreign key check by default. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [`foreign_key_checks`](/system-variables.md#foreign_key_checks) | Modified |  This variable controls whether to enable the foreign key constraint check. The default value changes from `OFF` to `ON`, which means enabling the foreign key check by default. |
```

| [`tidb_enable_foreign_key`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_foreign_key-new-in-v630) | Modified | This variable controls whether to enable the foreign key feature. The default value changes from `OFF` to `ON`, which means to enable foreign key by default. |
| [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | A new value option `prefer-leader` is added for this variable to improve the overall read availablity of TiDB clusters. When this option is set, TiDB prefers to select the leader replica to perform read operations. When the performance of the leader replica significantly decreases, TiDB automatically transfers the read operations to follower replicas.  |
| [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | A new value option `learner` is added for this variable to specify the learner replicas with which TiDB reads data from read-only nodes.  |

> | [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size) | Modified | This variable is used to control the batch size of the Coprocessor Tasks of the `IndexLookUp` operator. `0` means to disable batch. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value is adjusted from `0` to `4`, which means 4 Coprocessor Tasks will be batched into one task for each batch of requests.  |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size) | Modified | This variable is used to control the batch size of the Coprocessor Tasks of the `IndexLookUp` operator. `0` means to disable batch. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value is changed from `0` to `4`, which means 4 Coprocessor Tasks will be batched into one task for each batch of requests.  |
```

| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) | New | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-capture-to-capture-target-plans). The default value `OFF` means to disable the `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature. |
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | New  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |
| [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) | New | Determines whether to use enhanced pessimistic locking wake-up model for pessimistic transactions. The default value `OFF` means not to use such a wake-up model for for pessimistic transactions by default. |

### Configuration file parameters

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |

> | TiKV  |  `enable-statistics`  |  Deleted   |  This configuration items specifies whether to enable RocksDB statistics. Starting from v6.6.0, this item is deleted. RocksDB statistics are enabled for all clusters by default to help diagnostics. For details, see [tikv/tikv#13942](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13942).  |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| TiKV  |  `enable-statistics`  |  Deleted   |  This configuration item specifies whether to enable RocksDB statistics. Starting from v6.6.0, this item is deleted. RocksDB statistics are enabled for all clusters by default to help diagnostics. For details, see [tikv/tikv#13942](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13942).  |
```

| TiKV | `storage.block-cache.shared` | Deleted | Starting from v6.6.0, this configuration item is deleted, and the block cache is enabled by default and cannot be disabled. For details, see [#12936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12936). |
| TiKV | `storage.block-cache.block-cache-size` | Modified | Starting from v6.6.0, this configuration item is only used for calculating the default value of `storage.block-cache.capacity`. For details, see [#12936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12936). |

> | TiFlash |  [`profile.default.max_memory_usage_for_all_queries`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md#configure-the-tiflashtoml-file)  |  Modified  |  Specifies the memory usage limit for the generated intermediate data in all queries. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from 0 to 0.8, which means the limit is 80% of the total memory.|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| TiFlash |  [`profile.default.max_memory_usage_for_all_queries`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md#configure-the-tiflashtoml-file)  |  Modified  |  Specifies the memory usage limit for the generated intermediate data in all queries. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from `0` to `0.8`, which means the limit is 80% of the total memory. |
```

| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_filename`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_filename-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the file to which persistent data is written. |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of days to keep persistent data files. |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum size of a persistent data file (in MiB). |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660) | New | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of data files that can be persisted. `0` means no limit on the number of files. |

> | TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | New | Whether to enable scheduling for user foreground read/write requests according to the Request Unit (RU) of the corresponding resource groups. The default value is `false`, which means to disable scheduling according to the RU of the corresponding resource groups.|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | New | Whether to enable scheduling for user foreground read/write requests according to the Request Unit (RU) of the corresponding resource groups. The default value is `false`, which means to disable scheduling according to the RU of the corresponding resource groups. |
```

    In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    In v6.6, you need to enable both TiDB's global variable [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) and the TiKV configuration item [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource_control) to enable resource control. Currently, the supported quota method is based on "[Request Unit (RU)](/tidb-resource-control.md#what-is-request-unit-ru)". RU is TiDB's unified abstraction unit for system resources such as CPU and IO.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

* Use a temporary Witness replica to speed up failover [#12876](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12876) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996) @[ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     The Witness feature can be used to quickly recover from any failure to improve system availability and data durability. For example, in a Raft group of three replicas, if one replica fails, the system is fragile although it meets the majority requirement. It takes a long time to recover a new member (the process requires copying the snapshot first and then applying the latest logs), especially when the Region snapshot is large. In addition, the process of copying replicas might cause more pressure on unhealthy Group members. Therefore, adding a Witness replica can quickly remove the unhealthy node, reduce the risk of the Raft group being unavailable due to another node failure when recovering a new member (the Learner replica cannot participate in the election and submission), and ensure the security of logs during recovery.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The Witness feature can be used to quickly recover from any failure to improve system availability and data durability. For example, in a Raft group of three replicas, if one replica fails, the following issues might occur:

    - The system is fragile although it meets the majority requirement.
    - It takes a long time to recover a new member because the process requires copying the snapshot first and then applying the latest logs.
    - It takes more time especially when the Region snapshot is large.
    - The process of copying replicas might cause more pressure on unhealthy Group members.

    Therefore, adding a Witness replica can quickly remove the unhealthy node, reduce the risk of the Raft group being unavailable due to another node failure when recovering a new member (the Learner replica cannot participate in the election and submission), and ensure the security of logs during recovery.
```

Reviewer: LGTM

| `tidb_enable_concurrent_ddl` | Deleted | This variable controls whether to allow TiDB to use concurrent DDL statements. When this variable is disabled, TiDB uses the old DDL execution framework, which provides limited support for concurrent DDL execution. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is deleted and TiDB no longer supports the old DDL execution framework.  |
| `tidb_ttl_job_run_interval` | Deleted | This variable is used to control the scheduling interval of TTL jobs in the background. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is deleted, because TiDB provides the `TTL_JOB_INTERVAL` attribute for every table to control the TTL runtime, which is more flexible than `tidb_ttl_job_run_interval`.  |
| [`foreign_key_checks`](/system-variables.md#foreign_key_checks) | Modified |  This variable controls whether to enable the foreign key constraint check. The default value changes from `OFF` to `ON`, which means enabling the foreign key check by default. |

> | [`tidb_enable_foreign_key`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_foreign_key-new-in-v630) | Modified | This variable controls whether to enable the foreign key feature. The default value changes from `OFF` to `ON`, which means enabling foreign key by default. |

Author: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_foreign_key`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_foreign_key-new-in-v630) | Modified | This variable controls whether to enable the foreign key feature. The default value changes from `OFF` to `ON`, which means enabling foreign key by default. |
| `tidb_enable_general_plan_cache`  |  Modified  |   This variable controls whether to enable General Plan Cache. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is renamed to [`tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_non_prepared_plan_cache).  |
|  `tidb_general_plan_cache_size`  |  Modified   |   This variable controls the maximum number of execution plans that can be cached by General Plan Cache. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is renamed to [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size).  |
```

### Data migration

* TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration (experimental) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.6.0, DM's full migration capability integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.

    Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dm/dm-precheck.md#physical-import-check-items).

* TiDB Lightning adds a new configuration parameter "header-schema-match" to address the issue of mismatched column names between the source file and the target table @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)

>     In v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning adds a new profile parameter `header-schema-match`. The default value is `true`, which means the first row of the source CSV file is treated as the column name, and consistent with that in the target table. The value of `false` means the headers do not match. In previous versions, this scenario caused import errors. In v6.6.0, when you set this parameter to `false`, if the column order of the source file is the same as that of the target table, TiDB Lightning will ignore the column names in the source file and import the data directly in the order of the columns in the target table.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    In v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning adds a new profile parameter `header-schema-match`. The default value is `true`, which means the first row of the source CSV file is treated as the column name, and consistent with that in the target table. If the field name in the CSV table header does not match the column name of the target table, you can set this configuration to `false`. TiDB Lightning will ignore the error and continue to import the data in the order of the columns in the target table..
```

    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

### Data migration

* TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration (experimental) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.6.0, DM's full migration capability integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.

    Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dm/dm-precheck.md#physical-import-check-items).

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

* TiDB Lightning adds a new configuration parameter "header-schema-match" to address the issue of mismatched column names between the source file and the target table @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)

    In v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning adds a new profile parameter `header-schema-match`. The default value is `true`, which means the first row of the source CSV file is treated as the column name, and consistent with that in the target table. The value of `false` means the headers do not match. In previous versions, this scenario caused import errors. In v6.6.0, when you set this parameter to `false`, if the column order of the source file is the same as that of the target table, TiDB Lightning will ignore the column names in the source file and import the data directly in the order of the columns in the target table.

   For more information, see [TiDB Lightning (Task)](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).

```

| DM | Newly added | [`checksum-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | This configuration item controls whether DM performs `ADMIN CHECKSUM TABLE <table>` for each table to verify data integrity after the import. The default value is `"required"`, which performs admin checksum after the import. If checksum fails, DM pauses the task and you need to manually handle the failure. |
| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | New | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | New | Controls the type of replicas to be read. The value options are `leader`, `follower`, and `learner`. |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read.label`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | New | Sets labels for the target TiKV node. |

### Others

> - Support dynamically modifying `store-io-pool-size`. This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Support dynamically modifying [`store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530). This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.
```

> - Remove the limit on `LIMIT` statements, thus improving the execution performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Remove the limit on `LIMIT` clauses, thus improving the execution performance.
```

## Deprecated features

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

>     - Support limiting the global memory to alleviate the OOM problem [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
>     - Add the GC Tuner to alleviate the GC pressure [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)

Author: ```suggestion
    - Support limiting the global memory to alleviate the OOM problem (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
    - Add the GC Tuner to alleviate the GC pressure (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/foreign-key.md).

* <a name="multi-valued-index" style="text-decoration:none; color:inherit; cursor:default;">Support the MySQL-compatible multi-valued index (experimental)</a> [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**

    TiDB introduces the MySQL-compatible multi-valued index in v6.6.0. Filtering the values of an array in a JSON column is a common operation, but normal indexes cannot help speed up such an operation. Creating a multi-valued index on an array can greatly improve filtering performance. If an array in the JSON column has a multi-valued index, you can use the multi-value index to filter the retrieval conditions with `MEMBER OF()`, `JSON_CONTAINS()`, `JSON_OVERLAPS()` functions, thereby reducing much I/O consumption and improving operation speed.

    Introducing multi-valued indexes further enhances TiDB's support for the JSON data type and also improves TiDB's compatibility with MySQL 8.0.

>     For details, see [documentation]((/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    For details, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index)
```

| TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | Newly added | Whether to enable scheduling for user foreground read/write requests according to the Request Unit (RU) of the corresponding resource groups. The default value is `false`, which means to disable scheduling according to the RU of the corresponding resource groups. |
| PD  | [`pd-server.enable-gogc-tuner`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-gogc-tuner-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the GOGC tuner, which is disabled by default. |
| PD  | [`pd-server.gc-tuner-threshold`](/pd-configuration-file.md#gc-tuner-threshold-new-in-v660) | Newly added | The maximum memory threshold ratio for tuning GOGC. The default value is `0.6`. |
| PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit-gc-trigger`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-gc-trigger-new-in-v660) | Newly added | The threshold ratio at which PD tries to trigger GC. The default value is `0.7`. |
| PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-new-in-v660) | Newly added | The memory limit ratio for a PD instance. The value `0` means no memory limit. |

> | TiCDC | [`scheduler.region-per-span`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameter) | Newly added | Splits a table into multiple replication ranges based on the number of Regions, and these ranges can be replicated by multiple TiCDC nodes. The default value is `50000`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| TiCDC | [`scheduler.region-per-span`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameter) | Newly added | Splits a table into multiple replication ranges based on the number of Regions, and these ranges can be replicated by multiple TiCDC nodes. The default value is `50000`. |
| TiDB Lightning | [`compress-kv-pairs`](/tidb-lightning-configuration#tidb-lightning-task) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable compression when sending KV pairs to TiKV in the physical import mode.  The default value is empty, meaning that the compression is not enabled. |
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-DMR

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://cn.pingcap.com/product-community/)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>

>     <td rowspan="2">SQL<br /><br />SEAMLESS to use</td>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    <td rowspan="2">SQL Operations and Compatibility<br /><br />_SEAMLESS to use_</td>
```

    <td><a href="#foreign-key">Foreign Key</a></td>
    <td>Support MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints to maintain data consistency and improve data quality.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><a href="#multi-valued-index">Multi-valued index (experimental)</a></td>
    <td>Introduce MySQL-compatible multi-valued indexes and enhance the JSON type to improve TiDB's compatibility with MySQL 8.0.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td>DB Operations<br /><br />SMOOTH to use</td>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    <td>DB Operations<br /><br />_SMOOTH to use_</td>
```

>     <td><a href="#resource-group">Resource group (experimental)</a></td>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    <td><a href="#resource-group">Tenant resource group control (experimental)</a></td>
```

    <td>Support resource management based on resource groups, mapping database users to the corresponding resource groups and setting quotas for each resource group based on actual needs.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td>Stability<br /><br />RELIABLE to use</td>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    <td>Stability<br /><br />_RELIABLE to use_</td>
```

    <td><a href="#binding-his-ga">Historical SQL binding</a></td>
    <td>Support binding historical execution plans and quickly binding execution plans on TiDB Dashboard.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td rowspan="3">Performance<br /><br />POWERFUL to use</td>

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    <td rowspan="3">Performance<br /><br />_POWERFUL to use_</td>
```

     For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).

### Security

* TiFlash supports automatic rotations of TLS certificates [#5503](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5503) @[ywqzzy](https://github.com/ywqzzy) **tw@qiancai**

    In v6.6.0, TiDB supports automatic rotations of TiFlash TLS certificates. For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. In addition, the rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures high availability of the cluster.

    For more information, see [documentation](/enable-tls-between-components.md).

* TiDB Lightning supports accessing Amazon S3 data via AWS IAM role keys and session tokens [#4075](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40750) @[okJiang](https://github.com/okJiang) **tw@qiancai**

>     Before v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning only supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **user's access keys** (each access key consists of an access key ID and secret access key) so you cannot use a temporary session token to acess S3 data. Staring from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **role's access keys + session tokens** as well to improve the data security.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning only supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **user's access keys** (each access key consists of an access key ID and secret access key) so you cannot use a temporary session token to access S3 data. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **role's access keys + session tokens** as well to improve the data security.
```

    - Choose to combine all test environments into a single TiDB cluster, or group the batch tasks that consume more resources into a single resource group. It can improve hardware utilization and reduce operating costs while ensuring that critical applications can always get the necessary resources.

    In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    In v6.6, you need to enable both TiDB's global variable [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) and the TiKV configuration item [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource_control) to enable resource control. Currently, the supported quota method is based on "[Request Unit (RU)](/tidb-resource-control.md#what-is-request-unit-ru)". RU is TiDB's unified abstraction unit for system resources such as CPU and IO.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

* Support configuring read-only storage nodes for resource-consuming tasks <a href="https://github.com/v01dstar">@v01dstar</a> **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     In production environments, some read-only operations might consume a large number of resources regularly and affect the performance of the entire cluster, such as backups and large-scale data reading and analysis. TiDB v6.6.0 supports configuring read-only storage nodes for resource-consuming read-only tasks to reduce the impact on the online application. Currently, TiDB, TiSpark, and BR support reading data from read-only storage nodes. You can configure read-only storage nodes according to [steps](/readonly-nodes.md#steps) and specify where data is read through the system variable `tidb_replica_read`, the TiSpark configuration item `spark.tispark.replica_read`, or the br command line argument `--read-only`, to ensure the stability of cluster performance.

Author: ```suggestion
    In production environments, some read-only operations might consume a large number of resources regularly and affect the performance of the entire cluster, such as backups and large-scale data reading and analysis. TiDB v6.6.0 supports configuring read-only storage nodes for resource-consuming read-only tasks to reduce the impact on the online application. Currently, TiDB, TiSpark, and BR support reading data from read-only storage nodes. You can configure read-only storage nodes according to [steps](/readonly-nodes.md#steps) and specify where data is read through the system variable `tidb_replica_read`, the TiSpark configuration item `spark.tispark.replica_read`, or the br command line argument `--replica-read-label`, to ensure the stability of cluster performance.
```

    This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the `compress-kv-pairs` configuration item of TiDB Lightning to "gzip" or "gz".

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning-configuration#tidb-lightning-task).

* The TiKV-CDC tool is now GA and supports subscribing to data changes of RawKV [#48](https://github.com/tikv/migration/issues/48) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou) @[haojinming](https://github.com/haojinming) @[pingyu](https://github.com/pingyu) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    TiKV-CDC is a CDC (Change Data Capture) tool for TiKV clusters. TiKV and PD can constitute a KV database when used without TiDB, which is called RawKV. TiKV-CDC supports subscribing to data changes of RawKV and replicating them to a downstream TiKV cluster in real time, thus enabling cross-cluster replication of RawKV.

    For more information, see [documentation](https://tikv.org/docs/latest/concepts/explore-tikv-features/cdc/cdc/).

> * TiCDC supports scaling out a single table on Kafka changefeeds and distributing the changefeed to multiple TiCDC nodes [#7720](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7720) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* TiCDC supports scaling out a single table on Kafka changefeeds and distributing the changefeed to multiple TiCDC nodes (experimental) [#7720](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7720) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | Newly added | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Controls the type of replicas to be read. The value options are `leader`, `follower`, and `learner`. |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read.label`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Sets labels for the target TiKV node. |

### Others

- Support dynamically modifying [`store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530). This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.
- Remove the limit on `LIMIT` clauses, thus improving the execution performance.
- Starting from v6.6.0, BR does not support restoring data to clusters earlier than v6.5.0.

> ## Deprecated features

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
## Deprecated features

There are no deprecated features in this release.
```

## Improvements

+ TiDB

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ TiKV

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

+ PD

    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)
    - Support limiting the global memory to alleviate the OOM problem (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
    - Add the GC Tuner to alleviate the GC pressure (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)

+ TiFlash

>     - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides the foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin] **tw@qiancai**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides the foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw@qiancai**
```

    Before v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning only supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **user's access keys** (each access key consists of an access key ID and secret access key) so you cannot use a temporary session token to access S3 data. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **role's access keys + session tokens** as well to improve the data security.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning-data-source#import-data-from-amazon-s3).

### Telemetry

- Starting from Februray 20, 2023, the telemetry feature is disabled by default in new versions of TiDB and TiDB Dashboard (including v6.6.0). If you upgrade from a previous version that uses the default telemetry configuration, the telemetry feature is disabled after the upgrade. For the specific versions, see [TiDB Release Timeline](/releases/release-timeline.md).
- Starting from v1.11.3, the telemetry feature is disabled by default in newly deployed TiUP. If you upgrade from a previous version of TiUP to v1.11.3 or a later version, the telemetry feature keeps the same status as before the upgrade.

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>

> > If you are upgrading from v6.4 or earlier versions to v6.6, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in the intermediate versions.

Reviewer 9: should be v6.5 here?

Author: 6.5 to 6.6 does not have intermediate versions.

    - Fix the issue that a unique index might still produce duplicate data in some cases [#40217](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40217) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the PD OOM issue when there is a large number of Regions but the table ID cannot be pushed down when querying some virtual tables using `Prepare` or `Execute` [#39605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39605) @[djshow832](https://github.com/djshow832)
    - Fix the issue that data race might occur when an index is added [#40879](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40879) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the `can't find proper physical plan` issue caused by virtual columns [#41014](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41014) @[AilinKid](https://github.com/AilinKid)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB cannot restart after global bindings are created for partition tables in dynamic trimming mode [#40368](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40368) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)

>     - Fix the issue that auto analyze causes graceful shutdown to take a long time [#40038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40038) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that `auto analyze` causes graceful shutdown to take a long time [#40038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40038) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
```

    - Fix the panic of the TiDB server when the IndexMerge operator triggers memory limiting behaviors [#41036](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/41036) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge)
    - Fix the issue that the `SELECT * FROM table_name LIMIT 1` query on partitioned tables is slow [#40741](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40741) @[solotzg](https://github.com/solotzg)

+ TiKV

    - Fix an error that occurs when casting the `const Enum` type to other types [#14156](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14156) @[wshwsh12](https://github.com/wshwsh12)

>     - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14098](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

Reviewer 5: issue 号不一致 14098 14092

>     - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14098](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus] (https://github.com/overvenus)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14098](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

>     - Fix the data inconsistency issue caused by network failure between TiDB and TiKV during the execution of a DML after a failed pessimistic DML [#14038](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14038) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta) @[myonkeminta](https://github.com/myonkeminta)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the data inconsistency issue caused by network failure between TiDB and TiKV during the execution of a DML after a failed pessimistic DML [#14038](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14038) @[MyonKeminta](https://github.com/MyonKeminta)
```

+ PD

    - Fix the issue that the Region Scatter task generates redundant replicas unexpectedly [#5909](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5909) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
    - Fix the issue that the Online Unsafe Recovery feature would get stuck and time out in `auto-detect` mode [#5753](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5753) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996)
    - Fix the issue that the execution `replace-down-peer` slows down under certain conditions [#5788](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5788) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

>     - Fix the PD OOM issue that occurs when the calls of `ReportMinResolvedTS` is too frequent [#5965](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5965) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the PD OOM issue that occurs when the calls of `ReportMinResolvedTS` are too frequent [#5965](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5965) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
```

+ TiFlash

    - Fix the issue that querying TiFlash-related system tables might get stuck [#6745](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6745) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - Fix the issue that semi-joins use excessive memory when calculating Cartesian products [#6730](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6730) @[gengliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi)

>     - Fix the issue that the result of division operation on the DECIMAL data type is not rounded [#6393](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6393) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the result of the division operation on the DECIMAL data type is not rounded [#6393](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6393) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

> ---

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 6.6.0.
---
```

    <td>Resource control (experimental)</td>
    <td>Support resource management based on resource groups, mapping database users to the corresponding resource groups and setting quotas for each resource group based on actual needs.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Historical SQL binding</td>
    <td>Support binding historical execution plans and quickly binding execution plans on TiDB Dashboard.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">SQL Functionality<br /></td>
    <td>Foreign key</td>
    <td>Support MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints to maintain data consistency and improve data quality.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Multi-valued index (experimental)</td>
    <td>Introduce MySQL-compatible multi-valued indexes and enhance the JSON type to improve TiDB's compatibility with MySQL 8.0.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>DB Operations and Observability<br /></td>
    <td>DM support physical import (experimental)</td>
    <td>TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates TiDB Lightning's physical import mode to improve the performance of full data migration, with performance being up to 10 times faster.</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Feature Details

### Scalability

> 

Author: ```suggestion

* Support the next generation Partitioned-Raft-KV storage engine (experimental) [#11515](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11515) [#12842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12842) @[busyjay](https://github.com/busyjay) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies) @[5kbpers](https://github.com/5kbpers) @[SpadeA-Tang](https://github.com/SpadeA-Tang) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

    Before TiDB v6.6.0, TiKV's Raft-based storage engine used a single RocksDB instance to store the data of all Regions of the TiKV instance. To support larger clusters more smoothly, starting from TiDB v6.6.0, a new TiKV storage engine is introduced, which uses multiple RocksDB instances to store TiKV Region data, and the data of each Region is independently stored in a separate RocksDB instance. The new engine can better control the number and level of files in the RocksDB instance, achieve physical isolation of data operations between Regions, and support smoothly managing more data. You can see it as TiKV managing multiple RocksDB instances through partitioning, which is why the feature is named as Partitioned-Raft-KV. The main advantage of this feature is better write performance, faster scaling, and larger volume of data supported with the same hardware. It can also support larger cluster scale.

    Currently, this feature is experimental and not recommended for use in production environments.

```

* Remove the limit on `LIMIT` clauses [#40219](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40219) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@shichun-0415**

    Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB plan cache supports caching execution plans with a variable as the `LIMIT` parameter, such as `LIMIT ?` or `LIMIT 10, ?`. This feature allows more SQL statements to benefit from plan cache, thus improving execution efficiency.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-prepared-plan-cache.md).

* TiFlash supports data exchange with compression [#6620](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6620) @[solotzg](https://github.com/solotzg) **tw@TomShawn**

    To cooperate with multiple nodes for computing, the TiFlash engine needs to exchange data among different nodes. When the size of the data to be exchanged is very large, the performance of data exchange might affect the overall computing efficiency. In v6.6.0, the TiFlash engine introduces a compression mechanism to compress the data that needs to be exchanged when necessary, and then to perform the exchange, thereby improving the efficiency of data exchange.

>     For details, see [documentation]().

Reviewer 10: There's no link for this document. @TomShawn

Author: ```suggestion
    For details, see [documentation](/explain-mpp.md#mpp-version-and-exchange-data-compression).
```

    - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single cloud region, when an availability zone fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another availability zone.

     For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).

* Support rolling back DDL operations via the `FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP` statement [#14088](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/14088) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014) @[JmPotato](https://github.com/JmPotato) **tw@ran-huang**

    The [`FLASHBACK CLUSTER TO TIMESTAMP`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md) statement supports restoring the entire cluster to a specified point in time within the Garbage Collection (GC) lifetime. In TiDB v6.6.0, this feature adds support for rolling back DDL operations. This can be used to quickly undo a DML or DDL misoperation on a cluster, roll back a cluster within minutes, and roll back a cluster multiple times on the timeline to determine when specific data changes occurred.

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-flashback-to-timestamp.md).

### SQL

> * Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) [@crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) [@crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

* TiCDC supports scaling out a single table on Kafka changefeeds and distributing the changefeed to multiple TiCDC nodes (experimental) [#7720](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7720) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus) **tw@Oreoxmt**

    Before v6.6.0, when a table in the upstream accepts a large amount of writes, the replication capability of this table cannot be scaled out, resulting in an increase in the replication latency. Starting from TiCDC v6.6.0. the changefeed of an upstream table can be distributed to multiple TiCDC nodes in a Kafka sink, which means the replication capability of a single table is scaled out.

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#scale-out-the-load-of-a-single-large-table-to-multiple-ticdc-nodes).

* GORM adds TiDB integration tests. Now TiDB is the default database supported by GORM.

    - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) adapts to the `AUTO_RANDOM` attribute of TiDB [#104](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/104) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)

>     - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) fixes the issue that when connecting to TiDB, the `Unique` attribute of the `Unique` field cannot be modified during `AutoMigrate` [#105](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/104) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) fixes the issue that when connecting to TiDB, the `Unique` attribute of the `Unique` field cannot be modified during `AutoMigrate` [#105](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/105) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary).

### Security

* TiFlash supports automatic rotations of TLS certificates [#5503](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/5503) @[ywqzzy](https://github.com/ywqzzy) **tw@qiancai**

    In v6.6.0, TiDB supports automatic rotations of TiFlash TLS certificates. For a TiDB cluster with encrypted data transmission between components enabled, when a TLS certificate of TiFlash expires and needs to be reissued with a new one, the new TiFlash TLS certificate can be automatically loaded without restarting the TiDB cluster. In addition, the rotation of a TLS certificate between components within a TiDB cluster does not affect the use of the TiDB cluster, which ensures high availability of the cluster.

    For more information, see [documentation](/enable-tls-between-components.md).

* TiDB Lightning supports accessing Amazon S3 data via AWS IAM role keys and session tokens [#4075](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40750) @[okJiang](https://github.com/okJiang) **tw@qiancai**

>     Before v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning only supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **user's access keys** (each access key consists of an access key ID and secret access key) so you cannot use a temporary session token to access S3 data. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **role's access keys + session tokens** as well to improve the data security.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning only supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **user's access keys** (each access key consists of an access key ID and a secret access key) so you cannot use a temporary session token to access S3 data. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **role's access keys + session tokens** as well to improve the data security.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning-data-source#import-data-from-amazon-s3).

### Telemetry

- Starting from Februray 20, 2023, the telemetry feature is disabled by default in new versions of TiDB and TiDB Dashboard (including v6.6.0). If you upgrade from a previous version that uses the default telemetry configuration, the telemetry feature is disabled after the upgrade. For the specific versions, see [TiDB Release Timeline](/releases/release-timeline.md).
- Starting from v1.11.3, the telemetry feature is disabled by default in newly deployed TiUP. If you upgrade from a previous version of TiUP to v1.11.3 or a later version, the telemetry feature keeps the same status as before the upgrade.

## Compatibility changes

> **Note:**
>

> > If you are upgrading from v6.4 or earlier versions to v6.6, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in the intermediate versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This section provides compatibility changes you need to know when you upgrade from v6.5.0 to v6.6.0. If you are upgrading from v6.4.0 or earlier versions to v6.6.0, you might also need to check the compatibility changes introduced in intermediate versions.
```

### MySQL compatibility

> * Support the MySQL-compatible foreign key constraint [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints [#18209](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/18209) @[crazycs520](https://github.com/crazycs520) **tw@Oreoxmt**
```

>     For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-foreign-key.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in this document and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-foreign-key.md).
```

* Support the MySQL-compatible multi-valued index [#39592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39592) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990) **tw@TomShawn**

>     For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in v6.6.0 Release Notes and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see the [SQL](#sql) section in this document and [documentation](/sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md#multi-valued-index).
```

| [`tidb_enable_telemetry`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_telemetry-new-in-v402) | Modified | The default value changes from `ON` to `OFF`, which means that telemetry is disabled by default in TiDB. |
| `tidb_general_plan_cache_size` | Modified | This variable controls the maximum number of execution plans that can be cached by General Plan Cache. Starting from v6.6.0, this variable is renamed to [`tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_non_prepared_plan_cache_size). |
| [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | A new value option `learner` is added for this variable to specify the learner replicas with which TiDB reads data from read-only nodes. |
| [`tidb_replica_read`](/system-variables.md#tidb_replica_read-new-in-v40) | Modified | A new value option `prefer-leader` is added for this variable to improve the overall read availability of TiDB clusters. When this option is set, TiDB prefers to read from the leader replica. When the performance of the leader replica significantly decreases, TiDB automatically reads from follower replicas. |

> | [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size) | Modified | This variable is used to control the batch size of the Coprocessor Tasks of the `IndexLookUp` operator. `0` means to disable batch. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value is changed from `0` to `4`, which means 4 Coprocessor tasks will be batched into one task for each batch of requests. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size) | Modified | This variable controls the batch size of the Coprocessor Tasks of the `IndexLookUp` operator. `0` means to disable batch. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value is changed from `0` to `4`, which means 4 Coprocessor tasks will be batched into one task for each batch of requests. |
```

> | [`mpp_exchange_compression_mode`](/system-variables.md#mpp_exchange_compression_mode-new-in-v660)  | Newly added |  This variable is used to specify the data compression mode of the MPP Exchange operator. This variable takes effect when TiDB selects the MPP execution plan with the version number `1`. The default value `UNSPECIFIED` means that TiDB automatically selects the `FAST` compression mode. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`mpp_exchange_compression_mode`](/system-variables.md#mpp_exchange_compression_mode-new-in-v660)  | Newly added |  This variable specifies the data compression mode of the MPP Exchange operator. It takes effect when TiDB selects the MPP execution plan with the version number `1`. The default value `UNSPECIFIED` means that TiDB automatically selects the `FAST` compression mode. |
```

| [`mpp_version`](/system-variables.md#mpp_version-new-in-v660)  | Newly added |  This variable is used to specify different versions of the MPP execution plan. After a version is specified, TiDB selects the specified version of the MPP execution plan. The default value `UNSPECIFIED` means that TiDB automatically selects the latest version `1`. |

> | [`tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable is used to control whether to enable distributed execution of the DDL reorg phase to improve the speed of this phase. The default value `OFF` means not to enable distributed execution of the DDL reorg phase by default. Currently, this variable takes effect only for `ADD INDEX`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg`](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_distribute_reorg-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to enable distributed execution of the DDL reorg phase to accelerate this phase. The default value `OFF` means not to enable distributed execution of the DDL reorg phase by default. Currently, this variable takes effect only for `ADD INDEX`. |
```

| [`tidb_enable_historical_stats_for_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_historical_stats_for_capture) | Newly added | This variable controls whether the information captured by `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` includes historical statistics by default. The default value `OFF` means that historical statistics are not included by default. |

> | [`tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit--new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether Prepared Plan Cache caches execution plans that contain `COUNT` after `Limit`. The default value is `ON`, which means Prepared Plan Cache supports caching such execution plans. Note that Prepared Plan Cache does not support caching execution plans with a `COUNT` condition that counts a number greater than 10000. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit--new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable controls whether Prepared Plan Cache caches execution plans that contain `COUNT` after `Limit`. The default value is `ON`, which means Prepared Plan Cache supports caching such execution plans. Note that Prepared Plan Cache does not support caching execution plans with a `COUNT` condition that counts a number greater than 10000. |
```

| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-capture-to-capture-target-plans). The default value `OFF` means to disable the `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature. |

> | [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | Newly added  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | Newly added  | This variable controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |
```

| [`tidb_historical_stats_duration`](/system-variables.md#tidb_historical_stats_duration-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable controls how long the historical statistics are retained in storage. The default value is 7 days. |
| [`tidb_index_join_double_read_penalty_cost_rate`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_join_double_read_penalty_cost_rate-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to add some penalty cost to the selection of index join. The default value `0` means that this feature is disabled by default. |

> | [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to use enhanced pessimistic locking wake-up model for pessimistic transactions. The default value `OFF` means not to use such a wake-up model for pessimistic transactions by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to use enhanced pessimistic locking wake-up model for pessimistic transactions. The default value `OFF` means not to use such a wake-up model for pessimistic transactions by default. |
```

    - Support using `CURDATE()` as the default value of a column [#38356](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38356) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf)
    - `partial order prop push down` now supports the LIST-type partitioned tables [#40273](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40273) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros)
    - Add error messages for conflicts between optimizer hints and execution plan bindings [#40910](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40910) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent)
    - Optimize the plan cache strategy to avoid non-optimal plans when using plan cache in some scenarios [#40312](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40312) [#40218](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40218) [#40280](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40280) [#41136](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/41136) [#40686](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40686) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)
    - Clear expired region cache regularly to avoid memory leak and performance degradation [#40461](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40461) @[sticnarf](https://github.com/sticnarf)

+ TiKV

>     - Optimize the default values of some parameters in partitioned-raft-kv mode: the default value of the TiKV configuration item `storage.block-cache.capacity` is adjusted from 45% to 30%, and the default value of `region-split-size` is adjusted from `96MiB` adjusted to `10GiB`. When using raft-kv mode and `enable-region-bucket` is `true`, `region-split-size` is adjusted to 1GiB by default. [#12842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12842) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Optimize the default values of some parameters in partitioned-raft-kv mode: the default value of the TiKV configuration item `storage.block-cache.capacity` is adjusted from 45% to 30%, and the default value of `region-split-size` is adjusted from `96MiB` adjusted to `10GiB`. When using raft-kv mode and `enable-region-bucket` is `true`, `region-split-size` is adjusted to 1 GiB by default. [#12842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12842) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi)
```

    - Add the `evict-slow-trend-scheduler` scheduler to detect and schedule abnormal nodes [#5808](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5808) @[innerr](https://github.com/innerr)
    - Add the keyspace manager to manage keyspace [#5293](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5293) @[AmoebaProtozoa](https://github.com/AmoebaProtozoa)

+ TiFlash

    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides the foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw@qiancai**
    - Reduce the memory usage of TiFlash up to 30% when there is no query [#6589](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6589) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Optimize the concurrency of downloading log backup files on the TiKV side to improve the performance of PITR recovery in regular scenarios [#14206](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14206) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

>         - Support batch UPDATE DML statements to improve TiCDC replication performance [#8084](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8084) @[amyangfei](https://github.com/amyangfei)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - Support batch `UPDATE` DML statements to improve TiCDC replication performance [#8084](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8084) @[amyangfei](https://github.com/amyangfei)
```

        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiCDC)- Fix the issue that `transaction_atomicity` and `protocol` cannot be updated via the configuration file [#7935](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7935) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
        - Fix the issue that precheck is not performed on the storage path of redo log [#6335](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6335)
        - Fix the issue of insufficient duration that redo log can tolerate for S3 storage failure [#8089](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8089)
        - 修复 changefeed 在 tikv、CDC 节点扩缩容特殊场景下卡住的问题。 [#8197](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8197)
        - Fix the issue of too large traffic among TiKV nodes [#14092](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092)
        - Fix the performance issues of TiCDC in terms of CPU usage, memory control, and throughput when the pull-based sink is enabled [#8142](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8142) [#8157](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8157) [#8001](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8001) [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928)

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        `<!-- 4 -->`

>         - 修复 binlog-schema delete 失败的问题[#7373](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7373) @[liumengya94]
>         - 修复最后一个 binlog 为被 skip 的 ddl 会导致 checkpoint 不推进的问题[#8175](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8175) @[D3Hunter]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that the `binlog-schema delete` command fails to execute [#7373](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7373) @[liumengya94]
        - Fix the issue that the checkpoint does not advance when the last binlog is a skipped DDL [#8175](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8175) @[D3Hunter]
```

>         (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- 修复当在某个表上同时指定 `UPDATE` 和非 `UPDATE` 类型的表达式过滤规则 `expression-filter` 时，所有 `UPDATE` 操作被跳过的问题 [#7831](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7831) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) @[lance6716]
>         (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- 修复当某个表上仅指定 `update-old-value-expr` 或 `update-new-value-expr` 时，过滤规则不生效或 DM 发生 panic 的问题 [#7774](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7774) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) @[lance6716]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- Fix a bug that when the expression filters of both "update" and "non-update" types are specified in one table, all `UPDATE` statements are skipped [#7831](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7831) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) @[lance6716]
        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- Fix a bug that when only one of `update-old-value-expr` or `update-new-value-expr` is set for a table, the filter rule does not take effect or DM panics [#7774](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7774) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) @[lance6716]
```

>     - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14098](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14092](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

    + TiDB Lightning

        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning timeout hangs due to TiDB restart in some scenarios [#33714](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33714) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@shichun-0415**

>         - 修复并行导入时，当除最后一个外的 lightning 实例都遇到本地重复时，lightning 可能会跳过冲突处理的问题 [#40923](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40923) @[lichunzhu]
>         - 修复 precheck 无法准确检测目标集群是否存在运行中的 CDC 的问题 [#41040](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41040) @[lance6716]
>         - 修复 lightning 在 split-region 阶段 panic 问题（next key） [#40934](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40934) @[lance6716]
>         - 修复踢重逻辑可能导致 checksum 不一致的问题 [#40657](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40657) @[gozssky]
>         - 修复当数据文件中存在未闭合的 delimiter 可能导致 OOM 的问题 [#40400](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40400) @[buchuitoudegou]
>         - 修复报错中的文件 offset 超过文件大小的问题 [#40034](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40034) @[buchuitoudegou]
>         - 修复新版 PDClient 可能导致并行导入失败的问题 [#40493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40493) @[AmoebaProtozoa]
>         (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Lightning)- 修复 precheck 检查项有时无法监测到之前的导入失败遗留的脏数据的问题 [#39477](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39477) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun) @[dsdashun]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning might incorrectly skip conflict resolution when all but the last TiDB Lightning instance encounters a local duplicate record during a parallel import [#40923](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40923) @[lichunzhu]
        - Fix the issue that precheck cannot accurately detect the presence of a running TiCDC in the target cluster [#41040](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41040) @[lance6716]
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning panics in the split-region phase [#40934](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40934) @[lance6716]
        - Fix the issue that the conflict resolution logic (`duplicate-resolution`) might lead to inconsistent checksums [#40657](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40657) @[gozssky]
        - Fix a possible OOM problem when there is an unclosed delimiter in the data file [#40400](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40400) @[buchuitoudegou]
        - Fix the issue that the file offset in the error report exceeds the file size [#40034](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40034) @[buchuitoudegou]
        - Fix an issue with the new version of PDClient that might cause parallel import to fail [#40493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40493) @[AmoebaProtozoa]
        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Lightning)- Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning prechecks cannot find dirty data left by previously failed imports [#39477](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39477) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun) @[dsdashun]
```

        - Fix the issue that PITR does not support configuration changes for PD clusters [#14165](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14165) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that the connection failure between PD and tidb-server causes PITR backup progress not to advance [#41082](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41082) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot listen to PITR tasks due to the connection failure between PD and TiKV [#14159](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14159) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that the frequency of `resolve lock` is too high when there is no PITR backup task in the TiDB cluster [#40759](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40759) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
        - Fix the issue that when a PITR backup task is deleted, the residual backup data causes data inconsistency in new tasks [#40403](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40403) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)

    + TiCDC

>         `<!-- 6 -->`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

>         (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiCDC)- 修复不能通过配置文件修改 `transaction_atomicity` 和 `protocol` 参数的问题 [#7935](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7935) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiCDC)- Fix the issue that `transaction_atomicity` and `protocol` cannot be updated via the configuration file [#7935](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7935) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
```

>         - 修复 redo log 存储路径没做权限预检查的问题。 [#6335](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6335)
>         - 修复 redo log 容忍S3存储故障过短的问题。 [#8089](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8089)
>         - 修复 changefeed 在 tikv、CDC 节点扩缩容特殊场景下卡住的问题。 [#8197](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8197)
>         - 修复 在6.5 中引入tikv 节点之间流量过大的问题。 [#14092](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092)
>         - 优化 pull-based sink 打开时在 CPU 利用率、内存控制、吞吐等方面若干性能问题。[#8142](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8142) [#8157](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8157) [#8001](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8001) [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that precheck is not performed on the storage path of redo log [#6335](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6335)
        - Fix the issue of insufficient duration that redo log can tolerate for S3 storage failure [#8089](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8089)
        - 修复 changefeed 在 tikv、CDC 节点扩缩容特殊场景下卡住的问题。 [#8197](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8197)
        - Fix the issue of too large traffic among TiKV nodes [#14092](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092)
        - Fix the performance issues of TiCDC in terms of CPU usage, memory control, and throughput when the pull-based sink is enabled [#8142](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8142) [#8157](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8157) [#8001](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8001) [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/identify-slow-queries.md).

* Automatically capture the generation of SQL execution plans [#38779](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38779) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer) **tw@ran-huang**

    In the process of troubleshooting execution plan issues, `PLAN REPLAYER` can help preserve the scene and improve the efficiency of diagnosis. However, in some scenarios, the generation of some execution plans cannot be reproduced freely, which makes the diagnosis work more difficult.

    To address such issues, in TiDB v6.6.0, `PLAN REPLAYER` extends the capability of automatic capture. With the `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` command, you can register the target SQL statement in advance and also specify the target execution plan at the same time. When TiDB detects the SQL statement or the execution plan that matches the registered target, it automatically generates and packages the `PLAN REPLAYER` information. When the execution plan is unstable, this feature can improve diagnostic efficiency.

    To use this feature, set the value of [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) to `ON`.

>     For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md#使用-plan-replayer-capture-抓取目标计划)。

Reviewer 5: 链接需要换成英文

Author: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-capture)。
```

* Support persisting statements summary (experimental) [#40812](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40812) @[mornyx](https://github.com/mornyx) **tw@shichun-0415**

    Before v6.6.0, statements summary data is kept in memory and would be lost upon a TiDB server restart. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB supports enabling statements summary persistence, which allows historical data to be written to disks on a regular basis. In the meantime, the result of queries on system tables will derive from disks, instead of memory. After TiDB restarts, all historical data remains available.

    For more information, see [documentation](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary).

### Telemetry

Starting from v6.6.0, the [telemetry](/telemetry.md) is disabled by default for TiDB and TiDB Dashboard.

Starting from TiUP v1.11.3, the telemetry is disabled by default for newly deployed TiUP. If you upgrade your TiUP version to v1.11.3 or later, the telemetry keeps the setting of the old TiUP versions.

### Ecosystem

> * <a name="dm-physical" style="text-decoration:none; color:inherit; cursor:default;">TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration (experimental)</a> <a href="https://github.com/lance6716" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="no-referrer-when-downgrade">@lance6716</a> **tw@ran-huang**

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* <a name="dm-physical" style="text-decoration:none; color:inherit; cursor:default;">TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with physical import mode of TiDB Lightning for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration (experimental)</a> <a href="https://github.com/lance6716" target="_blank" referrerpolicy="no-referrer-when-downgrade">@lance6716</a> **tw@ran-huang**
```

>     In v6.6.0, DM's full migration capability integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    In v6.6.0, DM full migration capability integrates with physical import mode of TiDB Lightning, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.
```

>     Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure TiDB Lightning's physical import task separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning's tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure physical import tasks in TiDB Lightning separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/dm/dm-precheck.md#physical-import-check-items).

* TiDB Lightning adds a new configuration parameter "header-schema-match" to address the issue of mismatched column names between the source file and the target table <a href="https://github.com/dsdashun">@dsdashun</a>

    In v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning adds a new profile parameter `header-schema-match`. The default value is `true`, which means the first row of the source CSV file is treated as the column name, and consistent with that in the target table. If the field name in the CSV table header does not match the column name of the target table, you can set this configuration to `false`. TiDB Lightning will ignore the error and continue to import the data in the order of the columns in the target table.

    For more information, see [TiDB Lightning (Task)](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).

* TiDB Lightning supports enabling compressed transfers when sending key-value pairs to TiKV [#41163](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41163) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky) **tw@qiancai**

>     Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports compressing locally encoded and sorted key-value pairs for network transfer when sending them to TiKV, thus reducing the amount of data transferred over the network and lowering the network bandwidth overhead. In the earlier TiDB versions before this feature is supported, TiDB Lightning requires relatively high network bandwidth and incurs high traffic charges in case of large data volume.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports compressing locally encoded and sorted key-value pairs for network transfer when sending them to TiKV, thus reducing the amount of data transferred over the network and lowering the network bandwidth overhead. In the earlier TiDB versions before this feature is supported, TiDB Lightning requires relatively high network bandwidth and incurs high traffic charges in case of large data volumes.
```

| [`tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit--new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether Prepared Plan Cache caches execution plans that contain `COUNT` after `Limit`. The default value is `ON`, which means Prepared Plan Cache supports caching such execution plans. Note that Prepared Plan Cache does not support caching execution plans with a `COUNT` condition that counts a number greater than 10000. |
| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-capture-to-capture-target-plans). The default value `OFF` means to disable the `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature. |

> | [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | New  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | Newly added  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |
```

    - Add the GC Tuner to alleviate the GC pressure (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
    - 新增 `balance-witness-scheduler` 调度器用于调度 witness [#5763](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5763) @[ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow)
    - 新加 `evict-slow-trend-scheduler` 调度器用于异常节点检测和调度 [#5808](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5808) @[innerr](https://github.com/innerr)
    - 新加 keyspace manager，支持对 keyspace 的管理 [#5293](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5293) @[AmoebaProtozoa](https://github.com/AmoebaProtozoa)

+ TiFlash

    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides the foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin] **tw@qiancai**
    - 减少 TiFlash 在没有查询的情况下的内存使用，最高减少 30% [#6589](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6589) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - 优化 TiKV 端下载日志备份文件的并发度，提升常规场景下 PITR 恢复的性能。[#14206](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14206) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Optimize the concurrency of downloading log backup files on TiKV side to improve the performance of PITR recovery in regular scenarios [#14206](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14206) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
```

    + TiCDC

        <!-- 2 -->

>         - 支持 batch update dml 语句，提升 TiCDC 同步批量 update DML 的性能 [#8084](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8084)
>         (dup: release-6.3.0.md > 改进提升> Tools> TiCDC)- 采用异步的模式实现 MQ sink 和 MySQL sink，提升 sink 的吞吐能力 [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Support batch UPDATE DML statements to improve TiCDC performance when replicating batch UPDATE DML statements [#8084](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8084)
        - Implement MQ sink and MySQL sink in the asynchronous mode to improve the sink throughput [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

>         - Optimize DM alert rules and content [#7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**
> 
>          Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever a related error occured. But some alerts are caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce this kind of alerts, DM divides errors into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors:
> 
>         - For an error that is automatically recoverable, DM reports the alert only if the error occurs more than 3 times within 2 minutes.
>         - For an error that is not automatically recoverable, DM maintains the original behavior and reports the alert immediately.
> 
>         - 优化 relay 性能[#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Optimize DM alert rules and content [#7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

             Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever a related error occured. But some alerts are caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce this kind of alerts, DM divides errors into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors:

            - For an error that is automatically recoverable, DM reports the alert only if the error occurs more than 3 times within 2 minutes.
            - For an error that is not automatically recoverable, DM maintains the original behavior and reports the alert immediately.

        - Optimize relay performance [#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)
```

>     + TiDB Lightning
> 
>         - physical 导入模式支持 keyspace [#40531](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40531) @[iosmanthus]
>         - 支持通过 lightning.max-error 设置最大冲突个数 [#40743](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40743) @[dsdashun]
>         - 支持带有 BOM header 的数据文件 [#40744](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40744) @[dsdashun]
>         - 优化遇到 tikv 限流错误时处理逻辑，改为尝试其他不繁忙的 region [#40205](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40205) @[lance6716]
>         - 导入时关闭对表外键的检查 [#40027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40027) @[gozssky]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    + TiDB Lightning

        - Physical Import Mode supports Keyspace [#40531](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40531) @[iosmanthus](https://github.com/iosmanthus)
        - Support setting the maximum number of conflicts by `lightning.max-error` [#40743](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40743) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)
        - Support importing CSV data files with BOM headers [#40744](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40744) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)
        - Optimize the processing logic when encountering TiKV flow-limiting errors and try other available regions instead. [#40205](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40205) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
        - Disable checking the table foreign keys during import [#40027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40027) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky)
```

    + Dumpling

>         - 支持导出外键相关设置 [#39913](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39913) @[lichunzhu]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Support exporting settings for foreign keys [#39913](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39913) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)
```

    - 不支持在分区表上执行 MODIFY COLUMN [#39915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39915) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)
    - 禁止重命名分区表所依赖的列 [#40150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40150) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - 修复了 TTL 任务不能及时触发统计信息更新的问题 [#40109](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40109) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - 修复了 TiDB 构造 key 范围时对 null 值处理不当导致读到预期外数据的行为 [#40158](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40158) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
    - 修复了 MODIFY COLUMN 同时修改列默认值导致写入非法值的问题 [#40164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40164) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)
    - 修复了表 region 比较多时因 region 缓存失效导致加索引效率低下的问题 [#38436](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38436) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - 修复了分配自增 ID 时的数据竞争问题 [#40584](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40584) @[Dousir9](https://github.com/Dousir9)
    - Fix the issue that the implementation of the not expression of JSON is incompatible with the implementation of MySQL [#40683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40683) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)

>     - Fix the issue that concurrent view might cause DDL operations to be blocked [#40352](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40352) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that concurrent view might cause DDL operations to be blocked [#40352](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40352) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou)
    - Fix data inconsistency caused by concurrently executing DDL statements to modify columns of partitioned tables [#40620](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40620) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
```

>     - Fix the issue that DDL operations might be blocked in the concurrent view mode [#40352](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40352) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that concurrent view might cause DDL operations to be blocked [#40352](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40352) @[zeminzhou](https://github.com/zeminzhou)
```

    - Fix the issue that "Malformed packet" is reported when using `caching_sha2_password` for authentication without specifying a password [#40831](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40831) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
    - Fix the issue that a TTL task fails if the primary key of the table contains an `ENUM` column [#40456](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40456) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
    - Fix the issue that some DDL operations blocked by MDL cannot be queried in `mysql.tidb_mdl_view` [#40838](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40838) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that data race might occur during DDL ingestion [#40970](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40970) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

>     - Fix the issue that TTL task might delete some data incorrectly after the time zone changes [41043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41043) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TTL tasks might delete some data incorrectly after the time zone changes [41043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41043) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
```

    - Fix the issue that `JSON_OBJECT` might report an error in some cases [#39806](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39806) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might deadlock during initialization [#40408](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40408) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that the value of system variables might be incorrectly modified in some cases due to memory reuse [#40979](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40979) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)

>     - Fix the issue that data might be inconsistent with the index after creating a unique index in the ingest mode [#40464](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40464) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that data might be inconsistent with the index when a unique index is created in the ingest mode [#40464](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40464) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
```

+ PD
    <!-- 4 -->
    - 修复 region scatter 任务会生产多余非预期副本的问题 [#5920](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5920) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
    - 修复 online-unsafe-recovery 在 auto-detect 模式下卡住并超时的问题 [#5754](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5754) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996)
    - 修复 replace down peer 在特定条件下执行变慢的问题 [#5789](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5789)@[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
    - 修复调用 ReportMinResolvedTS 过高的情况下造成 PD OOM 的问题  [#5965](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5965) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

+ TiFlash
    <!-- 3 -->
    - 修复查询 TiFlash 相关的系统表可能会卡住的问题 [#6745](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6745) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - 修复半连接在计算笛卡尔积时，使用内存过量的问题 [#6730](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6730) @[gengliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi)
    - 修复了 decimal 进行除法运算时不舍入的问题 [#6393](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6393) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - Fix the issue that when restoring log backup, hot Regions cause the restore to fail [#37207](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37207) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
>         - 修复了恢复数据到正在运行日志备份的集群，导致日志备份文件无法恢复的问题 [#40797](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40797) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
>         - 修复了 PITR 功能不支持 CA-bundle 认证的问题 [#38775](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38775) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
>         - 修复了恢复时重复的临时表导致的 Panic 问题 [#40797](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40797) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
>         - 修复了 PITR 不支持 PD 集群配置变更的问题 [#14165](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14165) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
>         - 修复了 PD 与 tidb-server 的连接故障导致 PITR 备份进度不推进的问题 [#41082](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41082) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
>         - 修复了 PD 与 TiKV 的连接故障导致 TiKV 不能监听 PITR 任务的问题 [#14159](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14159) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
>         - 修复了当 TiDB 集群不存在 PITR 备份任务时，`resolve lock` 频率过高的问题 [#40759](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40759) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
>         - 修复了 PITR 备份任务被删除时存在备份信息残留导致新任务出现数据不一致的问题 [#40403](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40403) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when restoring log backup, hot regions cause the restore to fail [#37207](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37207) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
        - Fix the issue that restoring data to a cluster that is running log backup causes the log backup file to be unrecoverable [#40797](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40797) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
        - Fix the issue that the PITR feature does not support CA-bundle certificates [#38775](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38775) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the panic issue caused by duplicate temporary tables during recovery [#40797](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40797) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
        - Fix the issue that PITR does not support configuration changes for PD clusters [#14165](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14165) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that the connection failure between PD and tidb-server causes PITR backup progress not to advance [#41082](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41082) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot listen to PITR tasks due to the connection failure between PD and TiKV [#14159](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14159) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that the frequency of `resolve lock` is too high when there is no PITR backup task in the TiDB cluster [#40759](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40759) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
        - Fix the issue that when a PITR backup task is deleted, the residual backup data causes data inconsistency in new tasks [#40403](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40403) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
```

| [`tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_cache_for_param_limit--new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether Prepared Plan Cache caches execution plans that contain `COUNT` after `Limit`. The default value is `ON`, which means Prepared Plan Cache supports caching such execution plans. Note that Prepared Plan Cache does not support caching execution plans with a `COUNT` condition that counts a number greater than 10000. |
| [`tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_plan_replayer_capture) | Newly added | This variable controls whether to enable the [`PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature](/sql-plan-replayer.md#use-plan-replayer-capture-to-capture-target-plans). The default value `OFF` means to disable the `PLAN REPLAYER CAPTURE` feature. |
| [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb-tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) | Newly added  | Controls whether to enable the resource control feature. The default value is `OFF`. When this variable is set to `ON`, the TiDB cluster supports resource isolation of applications based on resource groups. |

> | [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to use enhanced pessimistic locking wake-up model for pessimistic transactions. The default value `OFF` means not to use such a wake-up model for pessimistic transactions by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [`tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_pessimistic_txn_aggressive_locking-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to use enhanced pessimistic locking wake-up model for pessimistic transactions. The default value `OFF` means not to use such a wake-up model for pessimistic transactions by default. |
| [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable is read-only. It controls whether to enable [statements summary persistence](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary). The value of this variable is the same as that of the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660). |
| [`tidb_stmt_summary_filename`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stmt_summary_filename-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable is read-only. It specifies the file to which persistent data is written when [statements summary persistence](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary) is enabled. The value of this variable is the same as that of the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_filename`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_filename-new-in-v660). | 
| [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable is read-only. It specifies the maximum number of data files that can be persisted when [statements summary persistence](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary) is enabled. The value of this variable is the same as that of the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_backups-new-in-v660). |
| [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable is read-only. It specifies the maximum number of days to keep persistent data files when [statements summary persistence](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary) is enabled. The value of this variable is the same as that of the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660). |
| [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This variable is read-only. It specifies the maximum size of a persistent data file when [statements summary persistence](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary) is enabled. The value of this variable is the same as that of the configuration item [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660). |
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 6.6.0.
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-DMR

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://cn.pingcap.com/product-community/)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="3">Scalability and Performance<br /></td>
    <td>TiKV support batch aggregate data requests</td>
    <td>This enhancement significantly reduces total RPCs in TiKV batch get operations. In situations where data is highly dispersed and the gRPC thread pool is stretched, batching coprocessor requests can improve performance by 50+%.</td>

>   </tr>

Author: ```suggestion
  </tr>
  <tr>
      <td>TiKV supports the Partitioned-Raft-KV storage engine</td>
      <td>TiKV introduces the next-generation storage engine Partitioned-Raft-KV, and each Region uses an independent RocksDB instance, which can easily expand the storage capacity of the cluster from TB to PB and provide more stable write latency and stronger expansion capabilities.</td>
  </tr>
```

  <tr>

>     <td>TiKV support batch aggregate data requests</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <td>TiKV supports batch aggregate data requests</td>
```

    <td>This enhancement significantly reduces total RPCs in TiKV batch get operations. In situations where data is highly dispersed and the gRPC thread pool is stretched, batching coprocessor requests can improve performance by 50+%.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>TiFlash supports stale read and compression exchange</td>

>     <td>TiFlash supports the stale read feature, which can improve query performance in scenarios where real-time requirements are not restricted. TiFlash supports data compression to improve the efficiency of parallel data exchange, overall performance for TPCH improves 10%, and can save 50+% network usage.</td>

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
    <td>TiFlash supports the stale read feature, which can improve query performance in scenarios where real-time requirements are not restricted. TiFlash supports data compression to improve the efficiency of parallel data exchange, overall performance for TPCH improves 10%, and can save over 50% network usage.</td>
```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">Reliability and Availability<br /></td>
    <td>Resource control (experimental)</td>
    <td>Support resource management based on resource groups, mapping database users to the corresponding resource groups and setting quotas for each resource group based on actual needs.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Historical SQL binding</td>
    <td>Support binding historical execution plans and quickly binding execution plans on TiDB Dashboard.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="2">SQL Functionality<br /></td>
    <td>Foreign key</td>
    <td>Support MySQL-compatible foreign key constraints to maintain data consistency and improve data quality.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Multi-valued index (experimental)</td>
    <td>Introduce MySQL-compatible multi-valued indexes and enhance the JSON type to improve TiDB's compatibility with MySQL 8.0.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>DB Operations and Observability<br /></td>

>     <td>DM support physical import (experimental)</td>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <td>DM supports physical import (experimental)</td>
```

    <td>TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates TiDB Lightning's physical import mode to improve the performance of full data migration, with performance being up to 10 times faster.</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Feature Details

### Scalability

> * Support the next generation Partitioned-Raft-KV storage engine (experimental) [#11515](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11515) [#12842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12842) @[busyjay](https://github.com/busyjay) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies) @[5kbpers](https://github.com/5kbpers) @[SpadeA-Tang](https://github.com/SpadeA-Tang) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)

Author: ```suggestion
* Support the next-generation Partitioned-Raft-KV storage engine (experimental) [#11515](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/11515) [#12842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12842) @[busyjay](https://github.com/busyjay) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi) @[tabokie](https://github.com/tabokie) @[bufferflies](https://github.com/bufferflies) @[5kbpers](https://github.com/5kbpers) @[SpadeA-Tang](https://github.com/SpadeA-Tang) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch)
```

>     Before TiDB v6.6.0, TiKV's Raft-based storage engine used a single RocksDB instance to store the data of all Regions of the TiKV instance. To support larger clusters more smoothly, starting from TiDB v6.6.0, a new TiKV storage engine is introduced, which uses multiple RocksDB instances to store TiKV Region data, and the data of each Region is independently stored in a separate RocksDB instance. The new engine can better control the number and level of files in the RocksDB instance, achieve physical isolation of data operations between Regions, and support smoothly managing more data. You can see it as TiKV managing multiple RocksDB instances through partitioning, which is why the feature is named as Partitioned-Raft-KV. The main advantage of this feature is better write performance, faster scaling, and larger volume of data supported with the same hardware. It can also support larger cluster scale.

Author: ```suggestion
    Before TiDB v6.6.0, TiKV's Raft-based storage engine used a single RocksDB instance to store the data of all Regions of the TiKV instance. To support larger clusters more stably, starting from TiDB v6.6.0, a new TiKV storage engine is introduced, which uses multiple RocksDB instances to store TiKV Region data, and the data of each Region is independently stored in a separate RocksDB instance. The new engine can better control the number and level of files in the RocksDB instance, achieve physical isolation of data operations between Regions, and support stably managing more data. You can see it as TiKV managing multiple RocksDB instances through partitioning, which is why the feature is named Partitioned-Raft-KV. The main advantage of this feature is better write performance, faster scaling, and larger volume of data supported with the same hardware. It can also support larger cluster scales.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/sql-plan-management.md#create-a-binding-according-to-a-historical-execution-plan).

* Add several optimizer hints [#39964](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39964) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent) **tw@TomShawn**

    TiDB adds several optimizer hints in v6.6.0 to control the execution plan selection of `LIMIT` operations.

    - [`ORDER_INDEX()`](/optimizer-hints.md#keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): tells the optimizer to use the specified index, to keep the order of the index when reading data, and generates plans similar to `Limit + IndexScan(keep order: true)`.
    - [`NO_ORDER_INDEX()`](/optimizer-hints.md#no_keep_ordert1_name-idx1_name--idx2_name-): tells the optimizer to use the specified index, not to keep the order of the index when reading data, and generates plans similar to `TopN + IndexScan(keep order: false)`.

>     Continuously introducing optimizer hints provides users with more intervention methods, helps solve SQL performance issues, and improves the stability of overall performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Continuously introducing optimizer hints provides users with more intervention methods, helps solve SQL performance issues, and improves the stability of overall performance.
```

### Availability

* Support configuring `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE` for [placement rules in SQL](/placement-rules-in-sql.md) [#38605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38605) @[nolouch](https://github.com/nolouch) **tw@qiancai**

    `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCES` provides data survival preference settings to increase the disaster survivability of data. By specifying `SURVIVAL_PREFERENCE`, you can control the following:

    - For TiDB clusters deployed across cloud regions, when a cloud region fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another cloud region.
    - For TiDB clusters deployed in a single cloud region, when an availability zone fails, the specified databases or tables can survive in another availability zone.

>      For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For more information, see [documentation](/placement-rules-in-sql.md#survival-preference).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/dynamic-config.md).

* Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster intialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo) **tw@shichun-0415**

    When you start a TiDB cluster for the first time, you can specify the SQL script to be executed by configuring the command line parameter `--initialize-sql-file`. You can use this feature when you need to perform such operations as modifying the value of a system variable, creating a user, or granting privileges.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660).

* TiDB Data Migration (DM) integrates with TiDB Lightning's physical import mode for up to a 10x performance boost for full migration (experimental) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) **tw@ran-huang**

    In v6.6.0, DM full migration capability integrates with physical import mode of TiDB Lightning, which enables DM to improve the performance of full data migration by up to 10 times, greatly reducing the migration time in large data volume scenarios.

>     Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios, you were required to configure physical import tasks in TiDB Lightning separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.

Reviewer 12: All are unified as Large。Before v6.6.0, for large data volume scenarios instead of “Before v6.6.0, for high data volume scenarios”

Author: ```suggestion
    Before v6.6.0, for large data volume scenarios, you were required to configure physical import tasks in TiDB Lightning separately for fast full data migration, and then use DM for incremental data migration, which was a complex configuration. Starting from v6.6.0, you can migrate large data volumes without the need to configure TiDB Lightning tasks; one DM task can accomplish the migration.
```

    For more information, see [TiDB Lightning (Task)](tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task).

* TiDB Lightning supports enabling compressed transfers when sending key-value pairs to TiKV [#41163](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41163) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky) **tw@qiancai**

    Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports compressing locally encoded and sorted key-value pairs for network transfer when sending them to TiKV, thus reducing the amount of data transferred over the network and lowering the network bandwidth overhead. In the earlier TiDB versions before this feature is supported, TiDB Lightning requires relatively high network bandwidth and incurs high traffic charges in case of large data volumes.

>     This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the `compress-kv-pairs` configuration item of TiDB Lightning to "gzip" or "gz".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    This feature is disabled by default. To enable it, you can set the `compress-kv-pairs` configuration item of TiDB Lightning to `"gzip"` or `"gz"`.
```

| Configuration file | Configuration parameter | Change type | Description |
| -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| TiKV  | `enable-statistics` | Deleted | This configuration item specifies whether to enable RocksDB statistics. Starting from v6.6.0, this item is deleted. RocksDB statistics are enabled for all clusters by default to help diagnostics. For details, see [#13942](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13942). |
| TiKV | `storage.block-cache.shared` | Deleted | Starting from v6.6.0, this configuration item is deleted, and the block cache is enabled by default and cannot be disabled. For details, see [#12936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12936). |
| DM | `on-duplicate` |  Deleted | This configuration item controls the methods to resolve conflicts during the full import phase. In v6.6.0, new configuration items `on-duplicate-logical` and `on-duplicate-physical` are introduced to replace `on-duplicate`. |
| TiDB | [`enable-telemetry`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-telemetry-new-in-v402) | Modified | Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from `true` to `false`, which means that telemetry is disabled by default in TiDB. |

> | TiKV  | [`rocksdb.defaultcf.block-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-size) and [`rocksdb.writecf.block-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-size)  |  Modified  |   The default values change from `64K` to `16K`.  |

Author: ```suggestion
| TiKV  | [`rocksdb.defaultcf.block-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-size) and [`rocksdb.writecf.block-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-size)  |  Modified  |   The default values change from `64K` to `32K`.  |
```

| DM | [`sorting-dir-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | Newly added | The directory used for local KV sorting in the physical import mode. The default value is the same as the `dir` configuration. |
| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | Newly added | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Controls the type of replicas to be read. The value options are `leader`, `follower`, and `learner`. |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read.label`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Sets labels for the target TiKV node. |

### Others

- Support dynamically modifying [`store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530). This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.
- Remove the limit on `LIMIT` clauses, thus improving the execution performance.

> - Starting from v6.6.0, BR does not support restoring data to clusters earlier than v6.5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Starting from v6.6.0, BR does not support restoring data to clusters of v6.1.0 or earlier versions.
v6.6.0 及以上的 BR 版本不支持恢复数据到 v6.1.0 及以下版本的集群。
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 6.6.0.
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: Februrary 20, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-[DMR](/releases/versioning.md#development-milestone-releases)

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://www.pingcap.com/download/?version=v6.6.0#version-list)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td rowspan="3">Scalability and Performance<br /></td>
    <td>TiKV supports Partitioned-Raft-KV storage engine (experimental)</td>
    <td>TiKV introduces the Partitioned-Raft-KV storage engine, and each Region uses an independent RocksDB instance, which can easily expand the storage capacity of the cluster from TB to PB and provide more stable write latency and stronger scalability.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>

>     <td>TiKV support <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/system-variables#tidb_store_batch_size" target="_blank">batch aggregating data requests</a></td>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <td>TiKV supports <a href="https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/system-variables#tidb_store_batch_size" target="_blank">batch aggregating data requests</a></td>
```

    Before v6.6.0, statements summary data is kept in memory and would be lost upon a TiDB server restart. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB supports enabling statements summary persistence, which allows historical data to be written to disks on a regular basis. In the meantime, the result of queries on system tables will derive from disks, instead of memory. After TiDB restarts, all historical data remains available.

    For more information, see [documentation](/statement-summary-tables.md#persist-statements-summary).

### Telemetry

- Starting from Februray 20, 2023, the telemetry feature is disabled by default in new versions of TiDB and TiDB Dashboard (including v6.6.0). If you upgrade from a previous version that uses the default telemetry configuration, the telemetry feature is disabled after the upgrade. For the specific versions, see [TiDB Release Timeline](/releases/release-timeline.md).
- Starting from v1.11.3, the telemetry feature is disabled by default in newly deployed TiUP. If you upgrade from a previous version of TiUP to v1.11.3 or a later version, the telemetry feature keeps the same status as before the upgrade.

> ### Ecosystem

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### TiDB tools
```

>     - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) adapts to the `AUTO_RANDOM` attribute of TiDB [#104](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/104) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)
>     - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) fixes the issue that when connecting to TiDB, the `Unique` attribute of the `Unique` field cannot be modified during `AutoMigrate` [#105](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/105) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)
>     - [GORM](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm) adds TiDB as the default database [#6014](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm/pull/6014) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)
>     - [GORM documentation](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm.io) mentions TiDB as the default database [#638](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm.io/pull/638) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) adapts to the `AUTO_RANDOM` attribute of TiDB [#104](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/104)
    - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) fixes the issue that when connecting to TiDB, the `Unique` attribute of the `Unique` field cannot be modified during `AutoMigrate` [#105](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/105)
    - [GORM](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm) adds TiDB as the default database [#6014](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm/pull/6014)
    - [GORM documentation](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm.io) mentions TiDB as the default database [#638](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm.io/pull/638)
```

| DM | [`sorting-dir-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | Newly added | The directory used for local KV sorting in the physical import mode. The default value is the same as the `dir` configuration. |
| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | Newly added | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Controls the type of replicas to be read. The value options are `leader`, `follower`, and `learner`. |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read.label`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Sets labels for the target TiKV node. |

### Others

> - Support dynamically modifying [`store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530). This facilitate more flexible TiKV performance tuning.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Support dynamically modifying [`store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530). This facilitates more flexible TiKV performance tuning.
```

    - Add the `evict-slow-trend-scheduler` scheduler to detect and schedule abnormal nodes [#5808](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5808) @[innerr](https://github.com/innerr)
    - Add the keyspace manager to manage keyspace [#5293](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5293) @[AmoebaProtozoa](https://github.com/AmoebaProtozoa)

+ TiFlash

    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides the foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw@qiancai**
    - Reduce the memory usage of TiFlash up to 30% when there is no query [#6589](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6589) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

        - Optimize the concurrency of downloading log backup files on the TiKV side to improve the performance of PITR recovery in regular scenarios [#14206](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14206) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)

    + TiCDC

>         - Support batch UPDATE DML statements to improve TiCDC replication performance [#8084](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8084)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        - Support batch UPDATE DML statements to improve TiCDC replication performance [#8084](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8084) @[amyangfei](https://github.com/amyangfei)
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 6.6.0.
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

> Release date: Februrary 20, 2023

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Release date: February 20, 2023
```

    When TiDB sends a data request to TiKV, TiDB compiles the request into different sub-tasks according to the Region where the data is located, and each sub-task only processes the request of a single Region. When the data to be accessed is highly dispersed, even if the size of the data is not large, many sub-tasks will be generated, which in turn will generate many RPC requests and consume extra time. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB supports partially merging data requests that are sent to the same TiKV instance, which reduces the number of sub-tasks and the overhead of RPC requests. In the case of high data dispersion and insufficient gRPC thread pool resources, batching requests can improve performance by more than 50%.

    This feature is enabled by default. You can set the batch size of requests using the system variable [`tidb_store_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_store_batch_size).

* Remove the limit on `LIMIT` clauses [#40219](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40219) @[fzzf678](https://github.com/fzzf678) **tw@shichun-0415**

>     Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB plan cache supports caching queries containing `?` after `Limit`, such as `Limit ?` or `Limit 10, ?`. This feature allows more SQL statements to benefit from plan cache, thus improving execution efficiency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB plan cache supports caching execution plans with a variable as the `LIMIT` parameter, such as `LIMIT ?` or `LIMIT 10, ?`. This feature allows more SQL statements to benefit from plan cache, thus improving execution efficiency.
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/best-practices/readonly-nodes.md).

* Support dynamically modifying `store-io-pool-size` [#13964](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13964) @[LykxSassinator](https://github.com/LykxSassinator)

    The TiKV configuration item [`raftstore.store-io-pool-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#store-io-pool-size-new-in-v530) specifies the allowable number of threads that process Raft I/O tasks, which can be adjusted when tuning TiKV performance. Before v6.6.0, this configuration item cannot be modified dynamically. Starting from v6.6.0, you can modify this configuration without restarting the server, which means more flexible performance tuning.

    For more information, see [documentation](/dynamic-config.md).

> * Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster intialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Support specifying the SQL script executed upon TiDB cluster initialization [#35624](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/35624) @[morgo](https://github.com/morgo)
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-kafka.md#scale-out-the-load-of-a-single-large-table-to-multiple-ticdc-nodes).

* [GORM](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm) adds TiDB integration tests. Now TiDB is the default database supported by GORM. [#6014](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm/pull/6014) @[Icemap](https://github.com/Icemap)

    - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) adapts to the `AUTO_RANDOM` attribute of TiDB [#104](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/104)
    - In v1.4.6, [GORM MySQL driver](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql) fixes the issue that when connecting to TiDB, the `Unique` attribute of the `Unique` field cannot be modified during `AutoMigrate` [#105](https://github.com/go-gorm/mysql/pull/105)
    - [GORM documentation](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm.io) mentions TiDB as the default database [#638](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm.io/pull/638)

>     For more information, see [GORM documentation](https://gorm.io/docs/index.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For more information, see [GORM documentation](https://gorm.io/docs/index.html).
```

    For more information, see [documentation](/enable-tls-between-components.md).

* TiDB Lightning supports accessing Amazon S3 data via AWS IAM role keys and session tokens [#4075](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40750) @[okJiang](https://github.com/okJiang)

    Before v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning only supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **user's access keys** (each access key consists of an access key ID and a secret access key) so you cannot use a temporary session token to access S3 data. Starting from v6.6.0, TiDB Lightning supports accessing S3 data via AWS IAM **role's access keys + session tokens** as well to improve the data security.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-data-source.md#import-data-from-amazon-s3).

### Telemetry

> - Starting from Februray 20, 2023, the [telemetry feature](/telemetry.md) is disabled by default in new versions of TiDB and TiDB Dashboard (including v6.6.0). If you upgrade from a previous version that uses the default telemetry configuration, the telemetry feature is disabled after the upgrade. For the specific versions, see [TiDB Release Timeline](/releases/release-timeline.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Starting from February 20, 2023, the [telemetry feature](/telemetry.md) is disabled by default in new versions of TiDB and TiDB Dashboard (including v6.6.0). If you upgrade from a previous version that uses the default telemetry configuration, the telemetry feature is disabled after the upgrade. For the specific versions, see [TiDB Release Timeline](/releases/release-timeline.md).
```

| DM | `on-duplicate` |  Deleted | This configuration item controls the methods to resolve conflicts during the full import phase. In v6.6.0, new configuration items `on-duplicate-logical` and `on-duplicate-physical` are introduced to replace `on-duplicate`. |
| TiDB | [`enable-telemetry`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#enable-telemetry-new-in-v402) | Modified | Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from `true` to `false`, which means that telemetry is disabled by default in TiDB. |
| TiKV  | [`rocksdb.defaultcf.block-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-size) and [`rocksdb.writecf.block-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-size)  |  Modified  |   The default values change from `64K` to `32K`.  |
| TiKV | [`rocksdb.defaultcf.block-cache-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-cache-size), [`rocksdb.writecf.block-cache-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-cache-size), [`rocksdb.lockcf.block-cache-size`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#block-cache-size) | Deprecated | Starting from v6.6.0, these configuration items are deprecated. For details, see [#12936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12936). |

> | PD | [`enable-telemetry`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-telemetry) | Modified | Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from `true` to `false`, which means that telemetry is disabled by default in TiDB Dasboard. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| PD | [`enable-telemetry`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-telemetry) | Modified | Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from `true` to `false`, which means that telemetry is disabled by default in TiDB Dashboard. |
```

| DM | [`import-mode`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) |  Modified | The possible values of this configuration item are changed from `"sql"` and `"loader"` to `"logical"` and `"physical"`. The default value is `"logical"`, which means using TiDB Lightning's logical import mode to import data. |
| TiFlash |  [`profile.default.max_memory_usage_for_all_queries`](/tiflash/tiflash-configuration.md#configure-the-tiflashtoml-file)  |  Modified  |  Specifies the memory usage limit for the generated intermediate data in all queries. Starting from v6.6.0, the default value changes from `0` to `0.8`, which means the limit is 80% of the total memory. |

> | TiCDC  | [`consistent.storage`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-mysql.md#prerequisites)  |  Modified  | The path under which redo log backup is stored. Two more value options are added for `scheme`, GCS, and Azure. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiCDC  | [`consistent.storage`](/ticdc/ticdc-sink-to-mysql.md#prerequisites)  |  Modified  | This configuration item specifies the path under which redo log backup is stored. Two more value options are added for `scheme`, GCS, and Azure. |
```

> | TiDB | [`initialize-sql-file`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Specifies the SQL script to be executed when the TiDB cluster is started for the first time. The default value is empty. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`initialize-sql-file`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#initialize-sql-file-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item specifies the SQL script to be executed when the TiDB cluster is started for the first time. The default value is empty. |
```

> | TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable statements summary persistence. The default value is `false`, which means this feature is not enabled by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to enable statements summary persistence. The default value is `false`, which means this feature is not enabled by default. |
```

> | TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable statements summary persistence. The default value is `false`, which means this feature is not enabled by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to enable statements summary persistence. The default value is `false`, which means this feature is not enabled by default. |
```

> | TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable statements summary persistence. The default value is `false`, which means this feature is not enabled by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_enable_persistent-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to enable statements summary persistence. The default value is `false`, which means this feature is not enabled by default. |
```

| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_days-new-in-v660) | Newly added | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum number of days to keep persistent data files. |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_file_max_size-new-in-v660) | Newly added | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the maximum size of a persistent data file (in MiB). |
| TiDB | [`tidb_stmt_summary_filename`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#tidb_stmt_summary_filename-new-in-v660) | Newly added | When statements summary persistence is enabled, this configuration specifies the file to which persistent data is written. |
| TiKV | [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource-control) | Newly added | Whether to enable scheduling for user foreground read/write requests according to the Request Unit (RU) of the corresponding resource groups. The default value is `false`, which means to disable scheduling according to the RU of the corresponding resource groups. |

> | PD  | [`pd-server.enable-gogc-tuner`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-gogc-tuner-new-in-v660) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable the GOGC tuner, which is disabled by default. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| PD  | [`pd-server.enable-gogc-tuner`](/pd-configuration-file.md#enable-gogc-tuner-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to enable the GOGC tuner, which is disabled by default. |
```

> | PD  | [`pd-server.gc-tuner-threshold`](/pd-configuration-file.md#gc-tuner-threshold-new-in-v660) | Newly added | The maximum memory threshold ratio for tuning GOGC. The default value is `0.6`. |
> | PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit-gc-trigger`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-gc-trigger-new-in-v660) | Newly added | The threshold ratio at which PD tries to trigger GC. The default value is `0.7`. |
> | PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-new-in-v660) | Newly added | The memory limit ratio for a PD instance. The value `0` means no memory limit. |
> | TiCDC | [`scheduler.region-per-span`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | Newly added | Splits a table into multiple replication ranges based on the number of Regions, and these ranges can be replicated by multiple TiCDC nodes. The default value is `50000`. |
> | TiDB Lightning | [`compress-kv-pairs`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) | Newly added | Controls whether to enable compression when sending KV pairs to TiKV in the physical import mode. The default value is empty, meaning that the compression is not enabled. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| PD  | [`pd-server.gc-tuner-threshold`](/pd-configuration-file.md#gc-tuner-threshold-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item specifies the maximum memory threshold ratio for tuning GOGC. The default value is `0.6`. |
| PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit-gc-trigger`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-gc-trigger-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item specifies the threshold ratio at which PD tries to trigger GC. The default value is `0.7`. |
| PD  | [`pd-server.server-memory-limit`](/pd-configuration-file.md#server-memory-limit-new-in-v660) | Newly added | This configuration item specifies the memory limit ratio for a PD instance. The value `0` means no memory limit. |
| TiCDC | [`scheduler.region-per-span`](/ticdc/ticdc-changefeed-config.md#changefeed-configuration-parameters) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to split a table into multiple replication ranges based on the number of Regions, and these ranges can be replicated by multiple TiCDC nodes. The default value is `50000`. |
| TiDB Lightning | [`compress-kv-pairs`](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md#tidb-lightning-task) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to enable compression when sending KV pairs to TiKV in the physical import mode. The default value is empty, meaning that the compression is not enabled. |
```

    - Clear expired region cache regularly to avoid memory leak and performance degradation [#40461](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40461) @[sticnarf](https://github.com/sticnarf)

+ TiKV

    `<!-- 6 -->`
    - Optimize the default values of some parameters in partitioned-raft-kv mode: the default value of the TiKV configuration item `storage.block-cache.capacity` is adjusted from 45% to 30%, and the default value of `region-split-size` is adjusted from `96MiB` adjusted to `10GiB`. When using raft-kv mode and `enable-region-bucket` is `true`, `region-split-size` is adjusted to 1GiB by default. [#12842](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12842) @[tonyxuqqi](https://github.com/tonyxuqqi)
    - Support priority scheduling in Raftstore asynchronous writes [#13730] (https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13730) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996)

>     - Support starting TiKV on a CPU with less than 1 core [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Support starting TiKV on a CPU with less than 1 core [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14017) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)
```

> | DM | [`sorting-dir-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | Newly added | The directory used for local KV sorting in the physical import mode. The default value is the same as the `dir` configuration. |
> | sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | Newly added | Controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
> | TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Controls the type of replicas to be read. The value options are `leader`, `follower`, and `learner`. |
> | TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read.label`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | Sets labels for the target TiKV node. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| DM | [`sorting-dir-physical`](/dm/task-configuration-file-full.md) | Newly added | This configuration item specifies the directory used for local KV sorting in the physical import mode. The default value is the same as the `dir` configuration. |
| sync-diff-inspector | [`skip-non-existing-table`](/sync-diff-inspector/sync-diff-inspector-overview.md#configuration-file-description) | Newly added | This configuration item controls whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream.  |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | This configuration item controls the type of replicas to be read. The value options are `leader`, `follower`, and `learner`. |
| TiSpark | [`spark.tispark.replica_read.label`](/tispark-overview.md#tispark-configurations) | Newly added | This configuration item is used to set labels for the target TiKV node. |
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        - Optimize DM alert rules and content [#7376](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7376) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter) **tw@hfxsd**

             Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever a related error occured. But some alerts are caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce this kind of alerts, DM divides errors into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors:

            - For an error that is automatically recoverable, DM reports the alert only if the error occurs more than 3 times within 2 minutes.
            - For an error that is not automatically recoverable, DM maintains the original behavior and reports the alert immediately.

        - Optimize relay performance by adding the async/batch relay writer [#4287](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/4287) @[GMHDBJD](https://github.com/GMHDBJD)

    + TiDB Lightning

>         - Physical Import Mode supports Keyspace [#40531](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40531) @[iosmanthus](https://github.com/iosmanthus)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Physical Import Mode supports keyspace [#40531](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40531) @[iosmanthus](https://github.com/iosmanthus)
```

        - Support importing CSV data files with BOM headers [#40744](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40744) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)
        - Optimize the processing logic when encountering TiKV flow-limiting errors and try other available regions instead [#40205](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40205) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
        - Disable checking the table foreign keys during import [#40027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40027) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky)

    + Dumpling

        - Support exporting settings for foreign keys [#39913](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39913) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)

    + Sync-diff-inspector

        - Add a new parameter `skip-non-existing-table` to control whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream [#692](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-tools/issues/692) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya94) **tw@shichun-0415**

>         - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

Author: ```suggestion
```

>     - Add the `balance-witness-scheduler` scheduler to schedule witness [#5763](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5763) @[ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow)

Author: ```suggestion
```

>              Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever a related error occured. But some alerts are caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce this kind of alerts, DM divides errors into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
             Previously, alerts similar to "DM_XXX_process_exits_with_error" were raised whenever a related error occurred. But some alerts are caused by idle database connections, which can be recovered after reconnecting. To reduce these kinds of alerts, DM divides errors into two types: automatically recoverable errors and unrecoverable errors:
```

## Bug fixes

+ TiDB

    - Fix the issue that a statistics collection task fails due to an incorrect `datetime` value [#39336](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39336) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
    - Fix the issue that `stats_meta` is not created following table creation [#38189](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38189) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
    - Refine the error message reported when a column that a partitioned table depends on is deleted [#38739](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38739) @[jiyfhust](https://github.com/jiyfhust)
    - Fix frequent write conflicts in transactions when performing DDL data backfill [#24427](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/24427) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Add a mechanism that `FLASHBACK CLUSTER` retries when it fails to check the `min-resolved-ts` [#39836](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39836) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)

>     - Fix the issue that sometimes an index cannot be created for an empty table using injest mode [#39641](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39641) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that sometimes an index cannot be created for an empty table using ingest mode [#39641](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39641) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
```

    - Fix data inconsistency caused by concurrently executing DDL statements to modify columns of partitioned tables [#40620](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40620) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that "Malformed packet" is reported when using `caching_sha2_password` for authentication without specifying a password [#40831](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40831) @[dveeden](https://github.com/dveeden)
    - Fix the issue that a TTL task fails if the primary key of the table contains an `ENUM` column [#40456](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40456) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
    - Fix the issue that some DDL operations blocked by MDL cannot be queried in `mysql.tidb_mdl_view` [#40838](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40838) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that data race might occur during DDL ingestion [#40970](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40970) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

>     - Fix the issue that TTL tasks might delete some data incorrectly after the time zone changes [41043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41043) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TTL tasks might delete some data incorrectly after the time zone changes [#41043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41043) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
```

    - Fix the issue that auto analyze causes graceful shutdown to take a long time [#40038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40038) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

    `<!-- compute 2-->`
    - Fix the panic of the TiDB server when the IndexMerge operator triggers memory limiting behaviors [#41036](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/41036) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge)
    - Fix the issue that the `SELECT * FROM table_name LIMIT 1` query on partitioned tables is slow [#40741](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40741) @[solotzg](https://github.com/solotzg)
    `<!-- transaction 1-->`

+ TiKV

    `<!-- 5 -->`
    - Fix an error that occurs when casting the `const Enum` type to other types [#14156](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14156) @[wshwsh12](https://github.com/wshwsh12)
    - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14098](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus] (https://github.com/overvenus)

>     - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot restart when the number of CPU cores is less than 1  [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14017) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot restart when the number of CPU cores is less than 1 [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14017) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)
```

>     - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot restart when the number of CPU cores is less than 1 [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14017) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    - Fix the issue that the execution `replace-down-peer` slows down under certain conditions [#5788](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5788) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)
    - Fix the PD OOM issue that occurs when the calls of `ReportMinResolvedTS` is too frequent [#5965](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5965) @[HundunDM](https://github.com/HunDunDM)

+ TiFlash
    `<!-- 3 -->`
    - Fix the issue that querying TiFlash-related system tables might get stuck [#6745](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6745) @[lidezhu](https://github.com/lidezhu)
    - Fix the issue that semi-joins use excessive memory when calculating Cartesian products [#6730](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6730) @[gengliqi](https://github.com/gengliqi)
    - Fix the issue that the result of division operation on the DECIMAL data type is not rounded [#6393](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6393) @[LittleFall](https://github.com/LittleFall)

+ Tools

    + Backup & Restore (BR)

>         - Fix the issue that when restoring log backup, hot regions cause the restore to fail [#37207](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37207) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that when restoring log backup, hot Regions cause the restore to fail [#37207](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37207) @[Leavrth](https://github.com/Leavrth)
```

        - Fix the issue that the connection failure between PD and tidb-server causes PITR backup progress not to advance [#41082](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41082) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot listen to PITR tasks due to the connection failure between PD and TiKV [#14159](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14159) @[YuJuncen](https://github.com/YuJuncen)
        - Fix the issue that the frequency of `resolve lock` is too high when there is no PITR backup task in the TiDB cluster [#40759](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40759) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)
        - Fix the issue that when a PITR backup task is deleted, the residual backup data causes data inconsistency in new tasks [#40403](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40403) @[joccau](https://github.com/joccau)

    + TiCDC

        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiCDC)- Fix the issue that `transaction_atomicity` and `protocol` cannot be updated via the configuration file [#7935](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7935) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)

>         - Fix the issue that precheck is not performed on the storage path of redo log [#6335](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6335)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that precheck is not performed on the storage path of redo log [#6335](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/6335) @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
```

>         - Fix the issue of insufficient duration that redo log can tolerate for S3 storage failure [#8089](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8089)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue of insufficient duration that redo log can tolerate for S3 storage failure [#8089](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8089)  @[CharlesCheung96](https://github.com/CharlesCheung96)
```

>         - 修复 changefeed 在 tikv、CDC 节点扩缩容特殊场景下卡住的问题。 [#8197](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8197)

Author: ```suggestion
        - 修复 changefeed 在 tikv、CDC 节点扩缩容特殊场景下卡住的问题。 [#8197](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8197) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)
```

>         - Fix the issue of too large traffic among TiKV nodes [#14092](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue of too high traffic among TiKV nodes [#14092](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus](https://github.com/overvenus)
```

>         - Fix the performance issues of TiCDC in terms of CPU usage, memory control, and throughput when the pull-based sink is enabled [#8142](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8142) [#8157](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8157) [#8001](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8001) [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the performance issues of TiCDC in terms of CPU usage, memory control, and throughput when the pull-based sink is enabled [#8142](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8142) [#8157](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8157) [#8001](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8001) [#5928](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/5928) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu) @[hi-rustin](https://github.com/hi-rustin)
```

    + TiDB Data Migration (DM)

        `<!-- 4 -->`

>         - Fix the issue that the `binlog-schema delete` command fails to execute [#7373](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7373) @[liumengya94]

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that the `binlog-schema delete` command fails to execute [#7373](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7373) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya94)
```

>         - Fix the issue that the checkpoint does not advance when the last binlog is a skipped DDL [#8175](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8175) @[D3Hunter]

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that the checkpoint does not advance when the last binlog is a skipped DDL [#8175](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8175) @[D3Hunter](https://github.com/D3Hunter)
```

>         (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- Fix a bug that when the expression filters of both "update" and "non-update" types are specified in one table, all `UPDATE` statements are skipped [#7831](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7831) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) @[lance6716]

Author: ```suggestion
        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- Fix a bug that when the expression filters of both "update" and "non-update" types are specified in one table, all `UPDATE` statements are skipped [#7831](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7831) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
```

>         (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- Fix a bug that when only one of `update-old-value-expr` or `update-new-value-expr` is set for a table, the filter rule does not take effect or DM panics [#7774](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7774) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716) @[lance6716]

Author: ```suggestion
        (dup: release-6.1.4.md > Bug 修复> Tools> TiDB Data Migration (DM))- Fix a bug that when only one of `update-old-value-expr` or `update-new-value-expr` is set for a table, the filter rule does not take effect or DM panics [#7774](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/7774) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
```

    + TiDB Lightning

        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning timeout hangs due to TiDB restart in some scenarios [#33714](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/33714) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) **tw@shichun-0415**

>         - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning might incorrectly skip conflict resolution when all but the last TiDB Lightning instance encounters a local duplicate record during a parallel import [#40923](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40923) @[lichunzhu]

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning might incorrectly skip conflict resolution when all but the last TiDB Lightning instance encounters a local duplicate record during a parallel import [#40923](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40923) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)
```

>         - Fix the issue that precheck cannot accurately detect the presence of a running TiCDC in the target cluster [#41040](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41040) @[lance6716]
>         - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning panics in the split-region phase [#40934](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40934) @[lance6716]
>         - Fix the issue that the conflict resolution logic (`duplicate-resolution`) might lead to inconsistent checksums [#40657](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40657) @[gozssky]
>         - Fix a possible OOM problem when there is an unclosed delimiter in the data file [#40400](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40400) @[buchuitoudegou]
>         - Fix the issue that the file offset in the error report exceeds the file size [#40034](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40034) @[buchuitoudegou]
>         - Fix an issue with the new version of PDClient that might cause parallel import to fail [#40493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40493) @[AmoebaProtozoa]

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that precheck cannot accurately detect the presence of a running TiCDC in the target cluster [#41040](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41040) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
        - Fix the issue that TiDB Lightning panics in the split-region phase [#40934](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40934) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
        - Fix the issue that the conflict resolution logic (`duplicate-resolution`) might lead to inconsistent checksums [#40657](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40657) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky)
        - Fix a possible OOM problem when there is an unclosed delimiter in the data file [#40400](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40400) @[buchuitoudegou](https://github.com/buchuitoudegou)
        - Fix the issue that the file offset in the error report exceeds the file size [#40034](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40034) @[buchuitoudegou](https://github.com/buchuitoudegou)
        - Fix an issue with the new version of PDClient that might cause parallel import to fail [#40493](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40493) @[AmoebaProtozoa](https://github.com/AmoebaProtozoa)
```

>         - 修复 changefeed 在 tikv、CDC 节点扩缩容特殊场景下卡住的问题。 [#8197](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8197) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that changefeed might get stuck in special scenarios such as when scaling in or scaling out TiKV or TiCDC nodes https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8174 @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)
```

Reviewer 4: <img width="647" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/59654584/220020004-d1048765-73a0-4c20-a909-97e6dceeaca3.png">

>         - Fix the issue that changefeed might get stuck in special scenarios such as when scaling in or scaling out TiKV or TiCDC nodes https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8174 @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)

Author: ```suggestion
        - Fix the issue that changefeed might get stuck in special scenarios such as when scaling in or scaling out TiKV or TiCDC nodes [#8174](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflow/issues/8174) @[hicqu](https://github.com/hicqu)
```

    - Choose to combine all test environments into a single TiDB cluster, or group the batch tasks that consume more resources into a single resource group. It can improve hardware utilization and reduce operating costs while ensuring that critical applications can always get the necessary resources.

    In addition, the rational use of the resource control feature can reduce the number of clusters, ease the difficulty of operation and maintenance, and save management costs.

    In v6.6, you need to enable both TiDB's global variable [`tidb_enable_resource_control`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_resource_control-new-in-v660) and the TiKV configuration item [`resource-control.enabled`](/tikv-configuration-file.md#resource_control) to enable resource control. Currently, the supported quota method is based on "[Request Unit (RU)](/tidb-resource-control.md#what-is-request-unit-ru)". RU is TiDB's unified abstraction unit for system resources such as CPU and IO.

    For more information, see [documentation](/tidb-resource-control.md).

* Support configuring read-only storage nodes for resource-consuming tasks @[v01dstar](https://github.com/v01dstar) **tw@Oreoxmt**

>     In production environments, some read-only operations might consume a large number of resources regularly and affect the performance of the entire cluster, such as backups and large-scale data reading and analysis. TiDB v6.6.0 supports configuring read-only storage nodes for resource-consuming read-only tasks to reduce the impact on the online application. Currently, TiDB, TiSpark, and BR support reading data from read-only storage nodes. You can configure read-only storage nodes according to [steps](/readonly-nodes.md#steps) and specify where data is read through the system variable `tidb_replica_read`, the TiSpark configuration item `spark.tispark.replica_read`, or the br command line argument `--replica-read-label`, to ensure the stability of cluster performance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In production environments, some read-only operations might consume a large number of resources regularly and affect the performance of the entire cluster, such as backups and large-scale data reading and analysis. TiDB v6.6.0 supports configuring read-only storage nodes for resource-consuming read-only tasks to reduce the impact on the online application. Currently, TiDB, TiSpark, and BR support reading data from read-only storage nodes. You can configure read-only storage nodes according to [steps](/readonly-nodes.md#procedures) and specify where data is read through the system variable `tidb_replica_read`, the TiSpark configuration item `spark.tispark.replica_read`, or the br command line argument `--replica-read-label`, to ensure the stability of cluster performance.
```

    - Support priority scheduling in Raftstore asynchronous writes [#13730] (https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13730) @[Connor1996](https://github.com/Connor1996)
    - Support starting TiKV on a CPU with less than 1 core [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14017) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)
    - Optimize the new detection mechanism of Raftstore slow score and add `evict-slow-trend-scheduler` [#14131](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14131) @[innerr](https://github.com/innerr)
    - Force the block cache of RocksDB to be shared and no longer support setting the block cache separately according to CF [#12936](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/12936) @[busyjay](https://github.com/busyjay)

+ PD

>     - Support limiting the global memory to alleviate the OOM problem (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Support managing the global memory threshold to alleviate the OOM problem (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
```

    - Add the GC Tuner to alleviate the GC pressure (experimental) [#5827](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5827) @[hnes](https://github.com/hnes)
    - Add the `balance-witness-scheduler` scheduler to schedule witness [#5763](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5763) @[ethercflow](https://github.com/ethercflow)
    - Add the `evict-slow-trend-scheduler` scheduler to detect and schedule abnormal nodes [#5808](https://github.com/tikv/pd/pull/5808) @[innerr](https://github.com/innerr)
    - Add the keyspace manager to manage keyspace [#5293](https://github.com/tikv/pd/issues/5293) @[AmoebaProtozoa](https://github.com/AmoebaProtozoa)

+ TiFlash

    - Support an independent MVCC bitmap filter that decouples the MVCC filtering operations in the TiFlash data scanning process, which provides the foundation for future optimization of the data scanning process [#6296](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/issues/6296) @[JinheLin](https://github.com/JinheLin) **tw@qiancai**

>     - Reduce the memory usage of TiFlash up to 30% when there is no query [#6589](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6589) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - Reduce the memory usage of TiFlash by up to 30% when there is no query [#6589](https://github.com/pingcap/tiflash/pull/6589) @[hongyunyan](https://github.com/hongyunyan)
```

    - Fix the issue that the `Unknown column` error is reported when creating an expression index [#39784](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39784) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that data cannot be inserted into a renamed table when the generated expression includes the table name [#39826](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39826) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that `INSERT IGNORE` statements cannot correctly fill in default values when the column is write-only [#40192](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40192) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that resources are not released when disabling the resource management module [#40546](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40546) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala)
    - `MODIFY COLUMN` is not supported on partitioned tables [#39915](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39915) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)

>     - Disable renaming of columns that partition tables depend on [#40150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40150) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
>     - Fix the issue that TTL tasks cannot trigger statistics updates in time [#40109](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40109) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
>     - Fix the issue that TiDB improperly handles `NULL` values when constructing key ranges, resulting in unexpected data being read [#40158](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40158) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
>     - Fix the issue that illegal values are written to the table when the `MODIFT COLUMN` statement modifies the default value of a column [#40164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40164) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)
>     - Fix the issue that the adding index operation is inefficient due to the invalid Region cache when there are many Regions in a table [#38436](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38436) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
>     - Fix the data race issue when allocating auto-increment IDs [#40584](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40584) @[Dousir9](https://github.com/Dousir9)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Disable renaming of columns that partition tables depend on [#40150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40150) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that TTL tasks cannot trigger statistics updates in time [#40109](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40109) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that unexpected data is read because TiDB improperly handles `NULL` values when constructing key ranges [#40158](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40158) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
    - Fix the issue that illegal values are written to a table when the `MODIFT COLUMN` statement also changes the default value of a column [#40164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40164) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)
    - Fix the issue that the adding index operation is inefficient due to invalid Region cache when there are many Regions in a table [#38436](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38436) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix data race occurred in allocating auto-increment IDs [#40584](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40584) @[Dousir9](https://github.com/Dousir9)
```

---
title: TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes
summary: Learn about the new features, compatibility changes, improvements, and bug fixes in TiDB 6.6.0.
---

# TiDB 6.6.0 Release Notes

Release date: xx, 2023

TiDB version: 6.6.0-DMR

Quick access: [Quick start](https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/v6.6/quick-start-with-tidb) | [Installation package](https://cn.pingcap.com/product-community/)

In v6.6.0-DMR, the key new features and improvements are as follows:

<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Category</th>
    <th>Feature</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>

>     <td rowspan="3">Scalability and Performance<br /></td>

Author: ```suggestion
    <td rowspan="4">Scalability and Performance<br /></td>
```

    - Support distributed data backfill for `ADD INDEX` (experimental) [#37119](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/37119) @[zimulala](https://github.com/zimulala)
    - Support using `CURDATE()` as the default value of a column [#38356](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38356) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf)

    `<!-- sql-planner 3-->`
    - `partial order prop push down` now supports the LIST-type partitioned tables [#40273](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40273) @[winoros](https://github.com/winoros)
    - Add error messages for conflicts between optimizer hints and execution plan bindings [#40910](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40910) @[Reminiscent](https://github.com/Reminiscent)
    - Optimize the plan cache strategy to avoid non-optimal plans when using plan cache in some scenarios [#40312](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40312) [#40218](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40218) [#40280](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40280) [#41136](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/41136) [#40686](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40686) @[qw4990](https://github.com/qw4990)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Clear expired region cache regularly to avoid memory leak and performance degradation [#40461](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40461) @[sticnarf](https://github.com/sticnarf)

```

        - Support importing CSV data files with BOM headers [#40744](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40744) @[dsdashun](https://github.com/dsdashun)
        - Optimize the processing logic when encountering TiKV flow-limiting errors and try other available regions instead [#40205](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40205) @[lance6716](https://github.com/lance6716)
        - Disable checking the table foreign keys during import [#40027](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40027) @[gozssky](https://github.com/gozssky)

    + Dumpling

        - Support exporting settings for foreign keys [#39913](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39913) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu)

    + Sync-diff-inspector

        - Add a new parameter `skip-non-existing-table` to control whether to skip checking upstream and downstream data consistency when tables in the downstream do not exist in the upstream [#692](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-tools/issues/692) @[lichunzhu](https://github.com/lichunzhu) @[liumengya94](https://github.com/liumengya94) **tw@shichun-0415**
        - note [#issue](链接) @[贡献者 GitHub ID](链接)

## Bug fixes

+ TiDB

    `<!-- sql-infra 41-->`

>     - Fix the issue that the statistics collection task fails due to an incorrect `DATETIME` value [#39336](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39336) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the statistics collection task fails due to an incorrect `datetime` value [#39336](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39336) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)
```

    - Disable renaming of columns that partition tables depend on [#40150](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40150) @[mjonss](https://github.com/mjonss)
    - Fix the issue that TTL tasks cannot trigger statistics updates in time [#40109](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40109) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that unexpected data is read because TiDB improperly handles `NULL` values when constructing key ranges [#40158](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40158) @[tiancaiamao](https://github.com/tiancaiamao)
    - Fix the issue that illegal values are written to a table when the `MODIFT COLUMN` statement also changes the default value of a column [#40164](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40164) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)
    - Fix the issue that the adding index operation is inefficient due to invalid Region cache when there are many Regions in a table [#38436](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/38436) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix data race occurred in allocating auto-increment IDs [#40584](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40584) @[Dousir9](https://github.com/Dousir9)

>     - Fix the issue that the implementation of the not expression of JSON is incompatible with the implementation of MySQL [#40683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40683) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the implementation of the not operator in JSON is incompatible with the implementation of MySQL [#40683](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40683) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
```

    - Fix the issue that TTL tasks might delete some data incorrectly after the time zone changes [41043](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41043) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
    - Fix the issue that `JSON_OBJECT` might report an error in some cases [#39806](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39806) @[YangKeao](https://github.com/YangKeao)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB might deadlock during initialization [#40408](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40408) @[Defined2014](https://github.com/Defined2014)
    - Fix the issue that the value of system variables might be incorrectly modified in some cases due to memory reuse [#40979](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40979) @[lcwangchao](https://github.com/lcwangchao)
    - Fix the issue that data might be inconsistent with the index when a unique index is created in the ingest mode [#40464](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40464) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that some truncate operations cannot be blocked by MDL when truncating the same table concurrently [#40484](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40484) @[wjhuang2016](https://github.com/wjhuang2016)

>     - Fix the issue that the privilege list returned by the `SHOW PRIVILEGES` command is incomplete [#40591](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40591) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that the `SHOW PRIVILEGES` statement returns an incomplete privilege list [#40591](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40591) @[CbcWestwolf](https://github.com/CbcWestwolf)
```

    - Fix the issue that TiDB panics when adding a unique index [#40592](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40592) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)
    - Fix the issue that executing the `ADMIN RECOVER` statement might cause the index data to be corrupted [#40430](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40430) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei)
    - Fix the issue that a query might fail when the queried table contains a `CAST` expression in the expression index [#40130](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40130) @[xiongjiwei](https://github.com/xiongjiwei)
    - Fix the issue that a unique index might still produce duplicate data in some cases [#40217](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40217) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

>     - Fix PD OOM when there is a large number of Regions but the table ID cannot be pushed down when querying some virtual tables using `Prepare` or `Execute` [#39605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39605) @[djshow832](https://github.com/djshow832)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - Fix the PD OOM issue when there is a large number of Regions but the table ID cannot be pushed down when querying some virtual tables using `Prepare` or `Execute` [#39605](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39605) @[djshow832](https://github.com/djshow832)
```

    - Fix the issue that data race might occur when an index is added [#40879](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40879) @[tangenta](https://github.com/tangenta)

    `<!-- planner 4-->`

>     - 修复了非法的 datetime 值导致 analyze 失败的问题 [#39336](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/39336) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    - Fix the `can't find proper physical plan` issue caused by virtual columns [#41014](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/41014) @[AilinKid](https://github.com/AilinKid)
    - Fix the issue that TiDB cannot restart after global bindings are created for partition tables in dynamic trimming mode [#40368](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40368) @[Yisaer](https://github.com/Yisaer)
    - Fix the issue that auto analyze causes graceful shutdown to take a long time [#40038](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40038) @[xuyifangreeneyes](https://github.com/xuyifangreeneyes)

    `<!-- compute 2-->`

>     - Fix the panic of the TiDB server when the IndexMerge operator triggering memory limiting behaviors [#41036](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/41036) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the panic of the TiDB server when the IndexMerge operator triggers memory limiting behaviors [#41036](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/41036) @[guo-shaoge](https://github.com/guo-shaoge)
```

    - Fix the issue that the `SELECT * FROM table_name LIMIT 1` query on partitioned tables is slow [#40741](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/40741) @[solotzg](https://github.com/solotzg)
    `<!-- transaction 1-->`

>     - Clear expired region cache regularly to avoid memory leak and performance degradation [#40461](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues/40461) @[sticnarf](https://github.com/sticnarf)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: moved it to "Improvements"

+ TiKV

    `<!-- 5 -->`
    - Fix an error that occurs when casting the `const Enum` type to other types [#14156](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14156) @[wshwsh12](https://github.com/wshwsh12)
    - Fix the issue that Resolved TS causes higher network traffic [#14098](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14092) @[overvenus] (https://github.com/overvenus)

>     - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot restart when the number of CPU cores is less than 1  [#13586] [#13752] [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>     - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot restart when the number of CPU cores is less than 1  [#13586] [#13752] [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Fix the issue that TiKV cannot restart when the number of CPU cores is less than 1  [#13586](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13586) [#13752](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13752) [#14017](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/14017) @[andreid-db](https://github.com/andreid-db)
```

>     - copr: 修复old collation时Like中的 _ pattern的行为 [#13785](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/pull/13785) @[Yangkeao](https://github.com/Yangkeao)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: The issue https://github.com/tikv/tikv/issues/13769 of this bug is already in v6.5.
